I'm going to go ahead and start this.
So, can you tell me your name and age, please?
Luis Valdez, I'm 79.
79 years old.
And then, can you tell me where you were born or where you grew up?
If it's the same place or different places?
No, I was born in Delano, California, 1940.
I was in a family of migrant farm workers, so we went up and down the state from LA to San Jose, and...
For a while, well, World War II interrupted and I was too young to travel, you know, besides my father had a farm that had belonged to a Japanese American farmer.
So he was farming that during the war.
But after the war, everything changed.
We lost the farm and we had to get back on the road again.
Some of my earliest memories of when I was six stemmed from that, that whole experience of being on the road.
And when you're young, I mean, it feels like it's your whole lifetime, but
Actually, we were on the road for seven years, from the time I was six until I was 13.
We moved to San Jose when I was 13, settled in San Jose, East San Jose.
We were still farm workers.
So for the next five years, I was still a farm worker in and around San Jose, you know, picking everything, tomatoes, beans, prunes, apricots, everything, apples.
And San Jose was very different then.
It was all orchards or row crops.
Even though, I mean, there were a lot of crops and a lot of small farms, there was still a lot of unemployment because there were a lot of farm workers around.
And so you had to get to the farm labor office really early in the morning, 4 or 4.30, to be able to really locate a job.
You know, if you were looking for a job, the competition was enormous.
I remember it was hard times.
It felt like the depression from the 1930s had extended all the way into the 50s.
So, and that was true throughout high school.
I graduated in 1958, and then I went to San Jose State for six years.
Where did you go to high school, just out of curiosity?
James Lick High School.
Oh, you did?
Yeah, it was the only high school on the east side.
And it impressed me because it was integrated.
And my brother, I had an older brother, my brother Frank, he passed away since then.
So he started going there in 55, I think.
56?
Yeah, 55.
No, we're 53.
He was in high school already.
He graduated in 55.
So 53 to 55.
I started in 54 at the James Lake.
And what impressed me was that there wasn't a segregation that I knew that had existed in Delano High School.
I never went to Delano High School.
My brother did.
But he would come home with stories about how racist it was.
Yeah.
You know, how, how the Mexicans and the blacks and the Okies and the Filipinos, you know, the Asians in general were all in separate camps.
You know, and the Japanese probably the ones that were more
Ambitious in that sense, you know.
So it was kind of like, uh, you know, you see like the prison movies where everybody has their own group.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
And, and Mexican club was called that.
It was the Mexican club, you know?
And, uh, and so they were not apologetic or anything.
It was pretty obvious that that's the way the San Joaquin ballet was.
Right.
And I wasn't really looking forward to going to Delano high school.
So when we moved to San Jose, uh, and I finished
grammar school at Evergreen.
I went to Evergreen Grammar School, eighth grade.
I found out I was ahead of my classmates.
For some reason, I mean, you'd think the San Joaquin Valley would be worse off, but it wasn't.
I was ahead of the students, you know, maybe half a year or something.
You'd say I was teaching them, you know, the teacher got to help me teach and that created enemies, you know, other students hated me.
Yeah.
And so I went to high school then to James Lick and
What I liked was the interracial mixing.
There was no Mexican club, nothing.
It was just, everybody was in the same high school.
And there was racism, but not as virulent as in the Valley.
And also, in my second year, there was a Chicano that was elected as student body president, right?
Eddie Alvarez.
So I still know Eddie.
We're still friends.
He's still involved in education.
And so...
And his brother, Sal Alvarez, also became my classmate and we kind of traded the class presidency there for a while.
So the fact that I was able to become class president in my freshman year was a huge difference for me to be able to have that possibility in San Jose.
So San Jose, as it turns out, was still racist.
I mean, underneath it all, there was still
But the people really expected you to fail.
I mean, if you were Chicano, they were black.
They didn't have too high expectations.
So even though I was a straight-A student, no one actually encouraged me to go to college.
I had to encourage myself.
And then I had a couple of professors that made a huge difference, too.
OK.
Yeah, I was going to ask you about how you found yourself at San Jose State.
How you found yourself at San Jose State, were there mentors?
Was your family encouraging you?
Well, the mentorship began in high school, actually, Mr. Farrell.
That's the one notable.
Actually, I'm very grateful to the teachers that I did have that encouraged me.
I mean, I got to say that.
And they weren't Chicanos.
They weren't Latinos.
They were Anglos, you know.
Middle West, Midwestern kind of types.
And...
Mr. Farrell, Ed Farrell, my English teacher, I'm still in touch with him.
You know, he's in his 90s.
He's getting way up there now.
He's really old.
But the fact is that I felt he respected me.
That made a big difference, you know, that when you're a kid and somebody respects you.
And I felt that he was fair the way that I was graded, you know, in my work.
He was very encouraging.
He's one of the reasons I became a writer, you know, because he was my English teacher.
But I love the sciences as well.
I really, as a matter of fact, when I went to Saturday State, I majored in math and physics my first year.
And I was a straight A student.
It wasn't that I didn't like the sciences, you know, it was why I got out.
I got out because my brother before me, who was a physics major and did receive a degree, became an engineer.
was sort of my advanced party.
You know, he kept told me once he graduated, went out into the field, there's a lot of racism out there.
It doesn't matter if you're an engineer, you know, you, you face that.
So, uh, also he changed.
He, he, he wanted to assimilate.
I mean, he was born in 1937.
So he had a greater fear of poverty than I did.
And he just had to get away from it.
And, uh, and he didn't want to be Mexican either.
So
He was very definitely the Mexican-American who wanted to assimilate.
He married an Anglo wife.
Sweet lady, really.
I loved her.
But the fact is that he had more problems than she did.
And so my reaction as a smaller, younger brother to my older brother,
kind of gravitated, made that change for me.
And he was rejecting his heritage and rejecting the family and not wanting to be Mexican.
I wanted to be Mexican.
So I became more Mexican, you know, and this is between high school and college.
I let my mustache grow out, you know, my hair grow out and started wearing huaraches.
I mean, that whole thing.
This is 1958, 59.
So nothing like that was happening anywhere on campus.
If there were Latinos out there, they didn't call themselves that.
They didn't even call themselves Chicanos.
We were Spanish as far as the world at large was concerned.
And some people didn't want to do that.
I mean, they just did not refer to themselves racially.
They wanted to assimilate.
They wanted to integrate.
They wanted to be American.
Totally, yeah, Anglo.
And so the color of skin, if they were lighter skinned, they got away with it.
If not, like me, if they were darker, they...
They looked back down at their own people.
I mean, I got that kind of reaction from people.
On the other hand, I found that my difference made me popular among Anglos.
So it went the other way, right?
Almost like they exoticized you or something.
Yeah, exactly.
And so...
for dating or whatever purposes that worked out real well, you know, it, it, uh, cause there weren't any Chicanos in the college.
I mean, there weren't any, I looked, I wanted to find, I did find one and I kissed her once.
She called me a dirty Mexican.
So I figured, we're not going to get anywhere here.
Let's go somewhere else.
And they're very different than say the Jewish girls, you know, who were much more, uh,
receptive more receptive yeah all right can i ask you just kind of a clarifying question before we get into the i have two questions but you could see these conversations kind of they go and grow and i'm okay with that if you're okay with it um but uh you had mentioned so your brother was was kind of more interested in assimilating and as kind of
to be rebellious towards him, you wanted to be more Mexican.
Exactly.
And where did you, like, I guess I'm trying to understand, like, where did you, how did you know that being more Mexican was, I'm going to grow my mustache, I'm going to grow my hair, I'm going to wear huaraches.
Like, where did that, where do you think that came from?
Was that something from your family?
Was it
Just, was it like images on movies or, you know what I mean?
Well, we're talking 5960, right?
It's about this time that I read La Raza Cosmica for the first time and I became interested in the Mexican Revolution.
As far as the mustache is concerned, I really just set out to imitate my grandfather, my mother's father, who had a big mustache, big black mustache, you know, and he was tall because I was a little kid, but he was...
The taller branch of the family, you know, my brother got some of that height.
Uh, my brother was almost six feet, five and a half, five and 11 and a half, something like that.
But, uh, my grandfather was tall and thin, you know, and kind of leathery skin.
He'd been a farmer.
He'd been a vaquero in Mexico, but there were no horses here.
So he worked in the fields.
Right.
But, uh, he was well preserved.
I used to love, uh, the way that he looked when he dressed up for Sundays and he had a brown suit that he wore with a Stetson hat.
And it seemed to be very, very dignified.
And I loved this mustache.
So I made the decision early on that I was going to grow a mustache when I grew up, you know, so I did.
And between high school and college is when I started that summer, I started to let it grow out.
And it became, you know, it became bigger and bigger as my college years.
I went from a small mustache into a larger mustache.
It's all white now, but...
But at that time, it was definitely a Mexican image, a Mexican revolution image, you know, Pancho Villa mustache, Zapata mustache.
I wanted that because it seemed to me heroic and it gave me a different image that I needed to go forward in my life in 1960, you know, by that time.
So it comes from family, it comes from the family background.
My dad also had a mustache, not as big.
but he always had a small mustache and mustaches seem to be part of the culture.
And so, uh, I, I still have them, you know, and, uh, I had a girlfriend once she called me be what this, and I loved that, you know, she was an Anglo girlfriend from Texas and she called me, um, be what this and cause she was bilingual.
So I love that aspect of it.
It just seemed very romantic and heroic and the right thing to do.
And, um,
That just got kind of the idea of the huarachis and you could buy white jeans in those days.
And so I started buying white jeans because they looked like calzon blanco, right?
And so the huarachis, the calzon blanco, the t-shirt, the army fatigue jacket, my long hair, the mustache, it became an image.
And when I started to write a column in 1963, that image became El Machete.
That was the name of the column.
So it was a profile that I was projecting into the college world that made me popular and made me feel good about myself.
And it kind of caught on.
You know, within five years, other people were doing it all over the state, you know, different campuses.
But I also made the very significant change of changing my name from Louis to Luis.
I didn't know your name was Louis.
Well, it was Louie actually in grammar school, you know, I was baptized Louis.
I mean, my name is Luis Miguel Valdez, right?
But in grammar school, I distinctly remember one teacher saying, well, you're Louie, your name is Louie.
And so it became Louie throughout grammar school and little Louie on top of that, because I wasn't that tall, you know?
So, but I didn't really like it.
I felt it demeaning.
And by the time I got to high school, I didn't want to be Louie.
I couldn't be Luis yet.
So I became Louis.
My friends knew me as Louis, you know, and that was not good either.
I wasn't happy with, but it was better than Louie.
But when I graduated from high school, it became really important for me to become Luis.
I went back to my original name.
And my Anglo friends had to struggle with it, you know, Luis, you know, they put two syllables instead of one.
Luis.
It's Luis.
And, uh, and that was all right though.
That, that was okay.
I could live with that.
Yeah.
Um.
Did you ever see, uh, who's that guy?
He's, um, he's like a Chicano songwriter, I think, uh, like the Chicano Superman guy.
Do you know who I'm talking about?
There's a story that he tells, and somebody made a little cartoon out of it, but he's talking about that experience of going to school as a young kid and having the white teachers rename you with an anglicized name, right?
And he's telling this story about, you know, we're all there, and one day, you know, this new, you know, Mexican student comes in.
His name is Facundo.
and they're like they're like what are we gonna call him fuck no so they ended up they they just they had to call him yeah and so all the he was saying how all the kids were like you know like he was the hero because he got to keep his name i thought it was a really cute story but um yeah we actually dealt with that experience in no saco nada en la escuela one of our early actors from 68 i believe um
Where there's a Francisco, Pancho, you know, and there's a Paco.
I mean, the name game becomes, but the grammar school teacher changes the name of the student.
That was a personal experience for me.
So I incorporated that right into that acto, but it used to happen to everybody.
It doesn't matter what your background is.
It could be Asian, you know, they'd be changed.
Teachers would be changing names.
In other words, you want to Christianize you.
They want to give you a Christian name, but not that Ruiz isn't.
Yeah.
And, uh, and, but the fact is that they anglicized this is what they were doing, making it easier for them to pronounce.
Right.
Instead of trying to stretch and pronounce your name the way it's supposed to be named.
It's better now.
I mean, I think that we've won that, that particular issue.
You know, I think people are more open to the idea of naming people with their, by calling people by their own names.
Yeah.
And there are many, many languages now, many, many different kinds of names that we see all over.
And well, and I was thinking, you know, a lot of that has to do with kind of like what you were saying is demeaning.
Right.
And it's it's it's just it's a sign of like disrespect.
Like I can I can call you whatever I want.
And I mean, you still see it like I still get people who are like, oh, can I call you Rosie?
no that's not my name you know yeah yeah yeah like I learned my name okay I learned yours but um yeah did you uh was there did I cut you off no no no um so we were talking about you going from James Lick to San Jose State and then um I think this will probably come out in in my kind of
larger question that I have right now.
But so the first question that I want to take some time to talk about is, what do you consider yourself?
I mean, I know this is an obvious question, but I'm going to ask it.
Do you consider yourself to be a participant of the Chicano movement?
And in what way did you see yourself as being a participant?
I'm actually one of the originators of the Chicano movement, not just a participant, because I was there before the Chicano movement.
If you go to my column, El Machete, which started being published in the fall of 63, what you begin to see in, and again, I only did it for a year and a half because I'll tell you that story.
I began to deal with issues that have been on my mind,
I was involved in the civil rights movement, but I wanted to translate those to my community.
And so I began to address issues of the Mexican-American identity and the Mexican-American community.
Now, Mexican-American was still a new phrase then.
I mean, we didn't call ourselves Mexican-Americans, you know.
We called ourselves Chicanos in the barrio.
If you were Pachuco, you called yourself a Chicano.
You called us a Mexicano, so no one called themselves Hispanics, you know.
Society at large calls us Spanish.
We were Spanish people, but that's ridiculous because I knew we weren't Spanish.
Yeah.
So, uh, the idea of calling yourself Mexican and then qualifying it with the American was really radical at the time, Mexican American, but, uh, it was pretty clumsy, you know, the hyphenated identity.
So they gravitated toward Chicano.
Eventually that became by the mid sixties, uh, that became the term that we approved of within the community.
But, um, it was, uh, it was a whole evolution that took place in terms of consciousness.
And so I was aware that, uh, we were, we were desperately in need of a civil rights movement of our own.
And so El Machete began to deal with those issues, uh, in 63.
And I began to call for some kind of coordinated, uh, social action in 64 and, uh,
And I wanted to do theater at the same time.
So that's a parallel concern.
It became political theater.
And those came together in 65 when I volunteered to join the United Farm Workers, right?
The National Farm Workers Association under Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta and sublimated a lot of my concerns about the Vietnam War.
and about racism in the schools, just to focus on the Grape Strike.
But the creation of El Teatro Campesino on the picket lines of the Atlanta Grape Strike in the fall of 65, eventually led us to attract a larger audience.
First with the March to Sacramento in the spring of 66 and 25 nights in a row, you know, with the
performing on a flatbed truck, gave the teatro a cohesion it had not had before that.
But it also exposed us to a massive audience.
Thousands of people had never seen the teatro, saw us perform on a flatbed truck.
And so, one of the outcomes of the March to Sacramento for the teatro was that we were invited to come to Stanford University to perform.
We came to one of the churches on campus, we performed there.
Uh, we, we were performing Unitarian Church in Los Angeles.
We began to tour and then we started going to colleges and universities, state colleges first, uh, and, uh, began to run into Mexican American students who reacted to what we were doing.
And the Huelga had a tremendous impact on the student population at different colleges.
And so, especially around Cinco de Mayo, you know, they began to organize springtime events in support of the United Farm Workers, but that eventually became a cultural event on its own.
And so Teatro became part of that.
Even after we left the United Farm Workers, that was our source of income that we were able to go to the Cinco de Mayo or at the fall 16 de septiembre, although those weren't as profitable because
The students had just gotten to campus and they didn't have time to really organize it.
So we'd have some shows in the fall, but the major ones were in the springtime in the summer.
And, and that's when we began then to define through the work, uh, some of these Chicano ideas.
And when we left Delano in the, in September of 67 and moved to Delray, 60 miles north by Fresno, um,
our first act was to try to redefine our work, to open up, uh, our subject matter from the Huelga into the war in Vietnam, into education.
I mentioned , uh, our public reading of Corky Gonzalez, I am Joaquin, you know, which she had given to me in a mimeograph copy, uh, the summer of 67 in our national tour.
Um,
All of that then began to promulgate and also focus on Chicano concepts and ideas.
And our articles of incorporation for El Centro Campesino Cultural in 68 defined what our purpose was, was to deliver the tools of the arts into the hands of the working class.
And at the same time, we're talking about our Mexican American heritage and the need to define that politically.
So that was in early 68.
And we took those ideas straight into campus.
And at that time, there were stirrings going on in Los Angeles.
Again, we were part and parcel of that.
We'd go to campuses in Los Angeles and stir up ideas and get people excited about what's coming up, what's happening.
That led to the creation of La Raza newspaper, you know, by Elia Cerrisco.
Yeah.
The one that's, it's from out of UCLA, right?
Well, Eliezer was not at UCLA at the time.
Risco was someone that I'd met in San Francisco, a Cuban American who happened to be the boyfriend of my girlfriend's ex-roommate from back East.
It's complicated, but she shows up.
Her name was Ruth Robinson, and she turns out to be also an early participant in the Chicano movement with Eliezer, Risco.
And they went...
Risco came and worked in Delano for a while.
He was asked to leave.
Actually, that's a different story, but he went to LA, East LA with Ruth and they started La Raza, the newspaper, which eventually led to the walkouts in LA.
So all of that is really part and parcel of that whole activity that was happening in early 68, that a lot of us were in contact, we were friends, you know, I knew
most of the early leaders of the Mexican, of the Chicano, uh, movement.
And, um, and we shared ideas and, and shared events, you know, and inspired each other.
And I saw that this was happening at every level, you know, it was not just civil rights.
It was also art and culture and cultural identity.
And, uh, and it was an exciting time because most of us were still in our twenties, you know, it was, uh,
And younger, we had teenagers in the teatro at the time, so it's important.
The column that you were talking about, El Machete, from 1963, so was that affiliated with something to do with San Jose State, or was that just something totally independent that you were doing and putting out?
How was that?
Where was it being distributed?
Were you just printing it?
handing it out to people.
No, no.
Eccéntrico is the magazine that it appeared in.
Now, it's like a shopper's newspaper in a way, but it was really the only publication that dealt with Mexicans in any way in San Jose.
And in the state, actually, there were some in LA.
L'Opinon, I'm sure, was a full-fledged newspaper in Los Angeles, but I didn't have access to that.
I was in San Jose.
So, uh,
Umberto Garza, I think was the publisher and, uh, he took a liking to me personally.
And so he offered me the opportunity to write this column.
And I don't remember how we met, but he was, uh, he was a gentleman and, uh, he had been publishing this for several years.
El Eccéntrico was really
something you could get at the grocery store, the Mexicans in grocery stores, you could buy it.
Yeah.
Uh, but it was a small little pamphlet, basically.
Kind of like, uh, La Oferta or like the Metro that they have in San Jose, like... Even smaller, actually.
It was tiny, you know?
Yeah.
But they carried news of the social clubs that existed in San Jose, the dances, nothing political whatsoever.
I introduced a political element, uh,
To the dismay of the older generation, they, they weren't happy with my ideas.
No, they, they were fearful that I was a communist.
They said, you know, but who is this guy who's this Chicano Ramplon, you know, that's coming out of the woodwork here.
But, uh, I was a new generation.
I was a voice and I think, uh,
Don Humberto knew this, you know, he, he, he sensed that I was speaking for this whole new generation that was about to explode on the world.
Again, because I was born in 1940, I was ahead of the baby boomers, you know, by six years, six to 10 years, you know, so most of the people that I began to, uh, impact on were about 10 years younger.
Yeah.
That was, uh, these were the Chicano boomers, you know, that came around, came around and, um, Lupe, for instance, is five years younger than me.
She's not a boomer exactly, but she's 1945.
So, um, these are very impressionable ages, you know, the early twenties, you're looking for something to believe in, to focus your adult, you know, energies and, and powers.
And so it's a good time for people to find mentors and, and, and if nothing had been, nothing was there for me before that I had to go to a different source of inspiration.
The theater gave me some of that, the Yiddish theater, believe it or not.
Uh, I became aware of Yiddish culture and Jewish culture through girlfriends in college.
So I became aware of Shalom Aleichem and other writers, you know, from the Jewish, uh,
uh, culture.
And, um, and I said, that's, that's something that I would like to do in my own context.
The Irish revolution of the early 20th century, uh, William Butler Yeats and John Singh were also playwrights also influenced me in that movement of the Irish to establish their own identity in Ireland.
And, and the liberation of Ireland from England made a lot of sense to me as a Chicano.
I said, Hey, I can, I can see how that parallels my history.
And so I want to do that.
I want to do that in my own context.
And so as it turns out, I was able to do that because I had the tool and my interest in the theater.
I took the theater and began to channel that.
In my studies in college, I discovered the American theater in the 30s specifically, but the political theater had roots all the way back to the early 20th century with the Wobblies,
And you have a number of key figures, you know, that are political figures, influenced me in terms of the early labor movement had theater productions.
And that combined with my studies of Mexican culture and what was happening in the 1920s, not just with the muralists, but also with the Vasconcelos as education minister, he started sending out teatros campesinos into the countryside.
That's what they were called, teatros campesinos.
These were peasant theaters that went out.
They weren't teaching people politics.
They were teaching people how to brush their teeth and how to delouse their children.
But I liked the idea of going out into the countryside.
I thought that makes sense to me.
And I also learned about Garcia Lorca, Federico Garcia Lorca in the 1930s.
traveling to the Spanish countryside in a truck, you know, with students from the University of Madrid and performing in the villages and performing his plays.
These were just things that I learned about in my studies, but I applied them to my experience.
And I said, the idea of a truck of a theater company going out makes perfect sense to me.
I can do that because I had been in the labor camps and I could take those elements and
make them gel into, into something that I could do in my time.
What I didn't have any in the college that had prepared me in any way was the form of theater that I needed to be able to do.
I knew I couldn't have curtains and the stage and all that, you know, out in the labor camp, but that came, that idea was expanded when I joined the San Francisco Mime Troupe.
Then after I graduated in 64, I moved to San Francisco.
And I, for a year, and I worked with the San Francisco Mime Troupe and we were performing in the parks, doing comedia, you know, with masks, putting up our own stage, drawing up an audience, you know, by banging the drum.
And I said, this is perfect.
This is exactly what I need.
And so my instincts kicked in, you know, I talk about epigenetic memory, you know, maybe, maybe there's something in my background that, that
propelled me in that direction, but I saw all those elements coming together pretty clearly.
The idea of using theater to espouse not only political ideals, but also cultural identity.
And then what I needed was a place for all of that to come together and happen like a, like a crucible, you know, and that became the, the United Farmer because that became Delano.
Right.
Ironically I was born in Delano, you know, half my,
family was on strike and the other half was scabbing.
So, so I had like a family involvement in Delano and an old score to settle with racist Delano.
So the idea of going back and bringing theater, uh, and volunteering basically with no money whatsoever to, um, try to expose these ideas in that context, you know, made a lot of sense to me.
It was
It gave me power, gave me energy.
And, and of course I was in my twenties, mid twenties.
So that was natural anyway.
It was the kind of thing that, uh, it was the right place to be at the right time.
I was very fortunate.
If it, if there was like a sense of fate or like destiny, that all these things are kind of coming together for you or, you know, not coming together for you, but that you're seeing these connections.
And then here's this thing.
that happens in your hometown.
Yeah.
Well, I believe in the wave principle, you know, the power of the wave.
It's the way that energy is transported.
It's the way that light works.
It's the way that water works, our seas.
And it's also the way that human culture operates on a global scale.
And in the 1960s, the wave worldwide had built to such a height
The civil rights movement was writing the crest of this wave and it was causing it at the same time was black people pushing, you know, from beneath to try to lift their heads up, you know, out of the sand that, um, that led to the creation of this way, but there were liberation movements all over the world, uh, after world war II.
there was a great deal of hope that maybe the world would be different after this massive slaughter.
And, uh, and so that way built and built and built and, uh, Cesar Chavez was able to plug into it, you know, uh, certainly Martin Luther King.
Uh, and it, it, that way broke eventually it, it, in the seventies, it kind of like broke like a wave and it went off on the sand and we went into the Reagan years.
Um,
The wave comes and goes.
Sometimes it's high, sometimes it's low.
I don't think it's been as high as it was in the 60s since then.
It'll be there eventually.
It'll come up again and rise to a new height because that's just the way life is.
It's the wave principle.
It's the up and down, you know, it's the coming and going.
And so I was, again, very fortunate to be 25 years old in 1965, to find Cesar Chavez and the Loras Huerta doing what they were doing in Delano.
again, where I was born, and then to go back and do that, having prepared myself consciously and unconsciously for a career in the theater.
I have some other questions, but before I forget this one, was there any concern on the part of people, whether it was Chavez or Dolores,
Um, was there any concern, like who is this guy coming here and trying to do plays?
Well, I'm sure there was, I mean, they were open to volunteers coming in and there were a lot of student, Anglo student volunteers, you know, coming to Delano to help.
A good source of energy without having to pay anybody, you know?
So, and a lot of passion, a lot of idealism that eventually got them in trouble with the union, but
At the top, I mean, it was, we just needed bodies.
We needed people.
So I was one of those.
I came in, but I was a Chicano.
That was the difference.
And not only that, I mean, I had met Cesar when I was six years old and I had to remind him that one of his running partners in Delano was my cousin, Billy Miranda, who was a Pachuco when they were both Pachucos.
So I think that family connection made a difference.
It doesn't mean that Cesar trusted me implicitly.
But he heard me, you know, he heard my spiel and the pitch that I wanted to organize a theater up by and for farm workers.
And at that time, just a year before the Free Southern Theater had started out of New York and been going into the South to perform, you know, in segregated areas in the South.
And that was a big inspiration for me because
The San Joaquin Valley was my South, you know, I was going down there.
So, uh, I went there without any expectations that I had money or a grant or funding of any kind.
I just kind of threw myself at the mercy of Cesar and the people.
And I said, look, I have this idea and if it's possible, I would like to do this.
And he said, fine, but there's no money to do theater and delay.
No, there are no actors.
There's no stage.
Right.
You know, we were on the picket line night and day.
Do you still want to do it?
And I said, absolutely.
And as it turns out, the picket line was a place where Teatro Campesino was born.
It was activism directly in the fields to try to bring the scabs out.
And then eventually we gravitated to the Friday night meetings and that gave us a different stage, a different, there were no stages.
I mean, it was just a little space open on the floor when we performed.
It was raw.
Okay.
But I mean, I felt the energy of it.
I felt
the destiny of it, that this was my destiny, that this is what I had to do in order to, to bring all these elements in my life together, that this was the right thing for me to do at the time.
And, and, uh, fortunately Cesar was open to it.
Um, certain Dolores was open to it so long as I didn't get in the way, you know, and, uh,
That's kind of what I was wondering about in terms of concerns.
Because, I mean, so just thinking about here on the one hand, you have a group that's organizing for a very specific purpose, which is labor, right?
They're trying to improve working conditions for the farm worker.
pay, whatever it is, right?
And then here comes Luis with, I have this theater, teatro idea, right?
But not only are you, or maybe I'm misunderstanding, but not only are you also talking about the farm worker issues, but you're bringing in extra stuff, right?
You're talking about the history, you're talking about identity and culture.
Or was that not happening...
at that point in time when you were, uh, starting in Delano.
Well, Cesar told me Percy, he said, those are his words.
I like you because you're, you're a Chicano.
You're one of us.
Right.
And, and that, that impressed me.
I said, great.
But you know, there's, there's something else.
The year before I went to Delano, I had been to Cuba.
After graduating, one of the things that happened there, uh,
from San Jose is I joined a group that was going to Cuba, uh, with a group of 75 American students.
And it was a radical thing to do.
It was actually my roommate who started it.
He's the one who was going to Cuba and he says, Hey, I'm going, you want to come?
And so, uh, and he was, uh, Polish American, Frank Tchorka.
He was an artist, activist, and, um,
I said, yeah, that's intriguing.
You know, it seems a long way to go, but I said, yeah, how can we do this?
How can I afford it?
And they said, no, they're paying for everything.
So Cuba paid for the whole trip.
And, uh, and as it turned out, Frank, uh, didn't even go to Cuba.
He went to Mississippi summer.
He went to registered voters in the South, he and his wife at the time, you know?
And, um, so I ended up going to Cuba and, uh,
I'd get a passport and it was the first time I'd ever flown any place.
So we, and it was all very, very, what can I say?
Secretively done.
You know, the FBI actually was on us.
They were watching us at every step, but we gathered in the Haight-Ashbury.
I remember spent one night there and then we went to the airport and the West Coast group flew to New York and we
We got together with the New York, the East coast branch, and then we flew to Paris and spent the night in Paris and then flew to Prague, Czechoslovakia, and picked up the Cubana de Aviacion from there and flew all the way back to Shannon, Ireland and Newfoundland and Gander, Newfoundland, and then Havana.
So it was 40 hours in the air to get to Cuba and the fifth year of the revolution, uh,
We met Che Guevara, I have a picture, you know, with a photo, meeting Che Guevara and played baseball with Fidel.
I have another picture of that.
And met other students and other activists along the way.
But we were definitely Americans who were definitely different than the Cubans.
Yeah.
they voided my passport as a result, you know, and, uh, we could have gone to jail actually if they had insisted on doing that.
It was a very radical thing to do.
Okay.
In, in the summer of 1964 and that was pointed out to Caesar right away.
So if he had any reason to distrust me, it would have, it would have been that, but because of the family connection, uh,
He didn't reject me.
He allowed me to stay.
And I explained to him.
I told him the story of where I went to Cuba and what had happened.
He was not shocked in any way.
Although I do think there was a part of him that was wary because there were all kinds of communists that were trying to participate in the farm workers movement.
And some in very helpful ways.
But he eventually separated himself, including from me.
purged all those people out.
They were too radical.
Uh, he himself, I think was a naturally born socialist, you know, like Dolores, you know, and there's nothing wrong with that.
I applaud that.
And, uh, we live in a country that had practices, socialism for the rich and capitalism for the poor.
Right.
And so, um, I think that what Cesar was trying to do was establish, uh,
social justice you know in the fields which still doesn't exist yeah um can i also ask you about um so during this time you had mentioned that you went to delano talked to caesar and was like i want to put together this group i want to do this yeah and
Who, so who was like part of that?
Who was it?
Was it you, your brother, Danny, right?
Not yet.
Oh, not yet.
No, the first person that I ran into was Agustin Lira.
And he played the guitar, which was great.
And I met with him.
I met him, because I was looking for people who just could play the guitar.
And I saw I'm playing the guitar, and I said, are you interested?
And he was.
But...
He had to wait for me to come and go because I had to come back to San Francisco and finish my business.
I met him, I think it was either early October, about a month before I actually moved back to Delano.
I made a foray.
I went in there and talked to Cesar and I talked to everybody and met, I met Augie and I said, we're going to need songs, you know?
So, and he was a gifted musician.
He still is, you know, he's a maestro as far as that's concerned.
He composed some beautiful songs.
Yeah.
But he was very, very young.
I mean, he must've been early twenties, you know, 21, 22 at the time.
So he had all the passions of youth, basically.
Uh, but he wasn't the type that would come out and start playing raucous corridos.
You know, that was my background.
I wanted to do raucous corridos.
He'd do soft, very romantic, very beautiful songs.
Uh, the March de Saga la Peregrinacion is his, you know, um,
he did a number of songs that are lyrical and very beautiful.
Uh, but, uh, together we, we drummed up a different, uh, repertoire of songs that we could take from the civil rights movement and translate them into Spanish.
I knew the translating for the most part and then we'd set them to the music.
Right.
And, uh, so he was one guitar and two guys, you know, basically.
So that's how it started.
Uh, then we, I had, I set up a workshop in November, uh,
There in the union office, actually there's a photo of me talking to the workers, the very first movement, first meeting really for the Teatro.
It was even filmed by a UCLA student group that came in, film students.
And I got that footage later from their teacher who happened to be a producer at Universal Studios, Verna Fields, the editor to Jaws.
Anyway, she said, I have this movie of you, this film footage of you talking to farm workers.
copy and so I got it from her.
But in any case, um, and what it took was improvisation.
This is where my, the techniques I'd picked up in the San Francisco Mime group began to work for me.
I set up improvisational techniques and I hung signs on people.
And then people would start, saw what I was doing.
They, they, they, the light turned on.
They said, Whoa, okay.
I see, I see what you're doing.
And out of that came again, the first group, Auggie was, you know,
Uh, Felipe Cantu was one of our early recruits.
He started out as a scab.
We found him in the fields, breaking the strike, but he saw the Teatro doing stuff.
We saw us singing songs and doing ridiculous stuff up on top of the flatbed truck.
And so he was a natural clown.
He gravitated to us immediately.
And so a lot of the personality of the Teatro Campesino really relates, it goes back to Felipe Cantu, you know, his, his personality, he gave his personality.
Tudonso Tako and other characters that he played.
But there were others that joined briefly and some that stayed longer.
Danny came after the March of Sacramento, he joined us.
We had to get out of San Jose and my mother said, take him, you're getting in trouble over here.
So he came and joined us, but he was only 17 at the time.
So it was, it was a real challenge for me.
to have, I was 26 by then, but to have a 17-year-old brother who wanted to be 17, you know?
Yeah.
And, but he played the guitar.
Danny played the guitar.
So then we had two guitars.
So he and Augie became, you know, a duet.
And Augie's brother joined eventually, you know, toward the end there.
And he also played the guitar.
So eventually, I mean, we had a group of
five, six, seven, eight people that started touring.
And one woman, you know, Carolina Franco, who would come and go with us.
Her parents didn't want her to go too far, but she had a lovely voice.
She could really sing, but we got her into some of the actors, you know, we couldn't get any other women because the parents or the husbands and boyfriends would not put up with it.
They didn't want to see any women acting.
with these payasos, right?
They didn't trust us out on tour.
No, sir, you're not taking my daughter out on the road.
So I understood that.
So if we had female roles, you'd put men in drag.
Basically, that's how we did it.
And all the farm workers cracked up in Delano, especially that we were doing that.
But we got some real crazies.
The people that were willing to do that were really naturally crazy and unreliable.
So the theater was really volatile at the time.
It was wild and it was raucous, you know, but there were only a few really stable personalities.
We had one Anglo volunteer, Doug Rippey, who joined, he came from Fresno, he had his own pickup truck.
just before the, the, our first national tour in 1967, the summer of 67.
And he played the guitarron and he was tall and blonde, you know, so he towered over all of us with a guitarron.
And, uh, and then he had his truck, which had a canopy so we could put all our stuff nice and safe in his pickup truck.
And so he, he left Delano with us to Delray and it turns out his father was, uh, Dr. Rippey.
at Fresno State, and we had dinner at his house one night after we left Delano, and we needed dinner, really.
We didn't always have enough to eat.
Yeah, so we're very grateful they invited us to dinner.
But then he proposed, he says, well, we have this thing in Fresno State called the Experimental College.
I would like to teach a course.
And so that was the beginning of Chicano studies at Fresno State in the state of California, actually.
This is January of 68, you know, and, um, but it came to that connection of Doug Rippey who had volunteered to join the strike and then became a musician in the teatro and then eventually took us to his father, which brought me to Fresno State.
I mean, all these things are consequential, right?
They're connected.
But the fact is that that early group, uh, of
The teatro, you know, it was Auggie, it was Felipe, Danny, it was, we had a Filipino called Conrado Villaseñor, Beto Reyes.
I mean, these are all characters that had different strengths and weaknesses, you know, and they were not actors.
They were farm workers and they weren't interested in making a life in the theater.
They couldn't conceive of it, you know, except maybe Felipe.
Felipe had some wild dreams and maybe...
And as it is, he ended up being the snake man in La Bamba.
He's the guy with the rattlesnakes.
That's Felipe Cantu.
And he was already dying from throat cancer at the time, so we had to mic him to get his voice, which is very hoarse in the movie, but his children were very happy and proud that their daddy made it into a Hollywood film, right?
Mostly the campesinos had a very short perspective on what we were doing.
There's one campesino who joined us and he studied this.
He looked at us improvising for a while.
And then, uh, I asked him because I was trying to recruit him and I said, what do you think Marcos?
He says, I don't know if you're a genius or you're an idiot.
That's what he told me.
So he performed with us once and then he shined it off.
He, he, but he became one of the best organizers that the union ever had in the boycott.
Right.
He didn't even know how to read and write, but he was very intelligent and, and gutsy, you know, he was able to go into situations where no one else would be.
And he wasn't that big.
He was about my size, you know, but I mean, he could walk into a bar and hold his own.
And, uh, he, he, I heard him give a speech later at Delano where he,
He talked that the irony of his going to Boston on the boycott was that Cesar was recruiting people to go on the national boycott.
And he heard, who wants to go to Boston?
But what he heard is who wants to go to Austin?
And he'd been in Texas, you know?
So he said, Austin, yay, right here.
So it turns out he wasn't going to Austin.
He was going to Boston.
So he ends up going to Boston and he ends up organizing, being one of the major organizers of the Boston boycott.
So he ends up giving speeches at Harvard and Yale.
And he still couldn't read and write.
He used to laugh.
So this guy was in the teatro.
came and went very quickly.
I would have loved to have had him in there, but he, he, that was not his thing.
He was, he was not, uh, he was not a comedian.
He was very serious.
And I think maybe that's, that's what made him do this other thing.
Right.
Yeah.
But in any case, um, we had, uh, we had a group, a motley crew in Delano.
Uh, Roy Valdez was another one.
Uh, no relation, you know, who was like a man child.
And, uh, he died tragically.
Uh, but yeah, I won't go into that detail, but the thing is that, um, our comings and goings, actually Roy was from Houston.
And, uh, so we all used to pack into a little station wagon and go cross country, right?
In those days.
Uh, and Roy took up a lot of space.
He was a big guy.
Um,
And he was funny on the stage.
He was a real presence.
He was almost Taliban like, you know, but, uh, unpredictable and with a temp, with a temper that was uncontrollable.
Sometimes you get into a fight, you know, with the guys and it was hard for me to control it.
Uh, two of them got into it.
These are grown men, right?
Yeah.
I mean, I had to step in and say, cut it guys, cool it, you know?
Uh, and, and, uh,
The teatro was like, at that time, you talk the early teatro, it was like a real volatile mix.
And of those really, Danny and Felipe and Augie, you know, were the core, I would say.
And that moved to Del Rey.
You know, when we moved to Del Rey and that grew a little bit, we had a few more people.
Until the end of 68, when I dissolved that whole group, I said,
It was too volatile, you know, they, they, they were doing, the guys were having late night parties, you know, I mean, we, we tried to keep a, a discipline, um, schedule going.
We're all living in one house, old farmhouse after Delano, we all moved into a farmhouse outside of Delray and we had a schedule.
We're eating communally.
We're sharing kitchen duties and, uh,
that worked all right for about a month.
And then it began to fall apart, you know, lack of discipline.
And, uh, it was becoming like bachelor pad or something.
It became a real bachelor pad and Danny would be in the living room singing at the top of his voice.
And I'm right in the next room over trying to get some sleep.
Right.
And then in the morning he wouldn't get up, you know, he wouldn't wake up because we had to start getting everybody up to seven 30 in the morning to take showers and, you know, be,
Our aim was to get to the office by nine, but we wouldn't, it started at 9.30, 10, you know, eventually people weren't rolling in until noon.
So it got, it got really... That's Mexican time, right?
Well, and then it went on late, you know, I mean, we'd work until 10 o'clock and then I'd go home, but then it turned out they were having parties after that.
And, uh, I didn't know about that.
So I got fed up with it.
You know, we did some great work, some interesting work in 1968, but by the end of the year, and it was a ruckus year anyway, two assassinations, you know, on the national level, the war in Vietnam was still raging.
I mean, it was, it was a nervous breakdown time really for everybody.
And so at the end of 68, I said, I can't go on this way.
I want to do something different.
And so I said, um,
I'm moving on.
You guys can go wherever you want.
I'm taking the teatro to another level.
So we moved to Fresno.
And that's when Phil Esparza joined, you know, your father, you know, also Felix came in as a student volunteer, you know, coming out of Fresno State because I started teaching at Fresno State.
And then the class that I taught brought in people.
Lupe joined.
She was one of my students.
And she graduated and started dropping into the Teatro in Del Rey.
So she became more and more of a regular member.
And so she joined in 68 until we broke the Teatro up at Del Rey and moved to Fresno.
And then she rejoined in Fresno.
And that's how we got together, right?
We became a couple on the trip to, our first trip to, to France.
The Teatro had really sort of dissolved and I was trying to bring it together again.
And we got this invitation to come to the Nancy World Theater Festival in Nancy, France in the spring of 69.
And that became a catalyst and I was able to recruit more people to come back into the theater because we were going to France, right?
So the theater was reborn, basically because we had this new opportunity.
We would have been reborn anyway, but I mean, this gave, made it quicker, made it faster, make it focused.
We had to rebuild our repertory up again, get the songs going.
get the old actos together because we're going to perform actos and the shrunken head of Panchoia at my first play at Nancy.
And so there are other minor chapters, you know, to this story, but I won't go into them.
All right.
Let me see if there's anything else that I'm not talking about about it.
Oh, one more kind of question, I think.
When you were at San Jose State, was, is his name Jorge Clor de Alba?
Yeah.
Did you work, was he there when you were a student there or was that afterwards?
I don't remember.
It was afterwards.
Oh, okay, okay.
Because I was just, I was curious, like,
What was it about being at San Jose State that really kind of, because they said this is about, you know, when you first get to San Jose State is when you start writing this column, is when you start learning about, you decide, I'm going to identify as Mexican, is when you start reading more about the Mexican Revolution and Mexican history.
And, um, Vasconcelos.
Uh, so I was just wondering, was there somebody at San Jose State?
Was there a friend, um, a professor, somebody that, or was it just kind of like, you know.
Spontaneous.
Spontaneous or yeah.
There were no mentors as such, you know, there were no kind of mentors.
Okay.
That's what I'm saying.
There was nothing there.
Uh, in an odd kind of way, the circumstances, uh, provided me with an opportunity I wouldn't have had.
Like I say, I was a farm worker until I was 18.
And I was in, uh, I was at San Jose State the last time that I worked in the fields.
I was already like a math and physics major.
Right.
Cutting broccoli.
You know, I use that line in ballet of the heart, you know, what am I doing cutting broccoli, uh, on the weekends, which
I decided that I needed to do something else.
So I went around looking for a different job.
And eventually I got a job at the library.
1960 actually was beginning of 60 or late 59.
I got a job as a stacker.
That's all.
You'd collect the books that had been returned, put them on a cart, take them up into the stacks and put them back in their place.
But that gave me an opportunity to wander all over
the library.
And so I went into the stacks and I discovered Mexican literature.
I discovered drama, you know, stuff that I would never have found, you know, on my own.
It was because I was working there and I could also find books that were coming in that were new.
And so I discovered Bertolt Brecht in a new book.
Martin Eslund's book came in, the biography of Bertolt Brecht.
And it was a brand new book, Little Red Book.
And I said, I got to read this.
So I was one of the first to read it.
So as it arrived, I have it there.
Same way I've discovered, well, Mexican literature.
You know, Jose Vasconcelos, La Raza Cosmica.
I discovered the Mexican novelist.
Jesus, what's his name?
Anyway, I met him later.
But the thing is that, that,
It was in these forays into the stacks that I discovered books that became part of my intellectual formation.
I was aware of what was going on in the civil rights movement.
I was attending marches and demonstrations in and around the Bay area.
The Vietnam war hadn't really gelled just yet, but I was in one of the very first meetings that I went to.
I remember someone put up a map and said, this is Indochina.
And they said, it's the site of America's next war.
We hadn't even gone in there yet.
We were helping out the French.
I remember the French, I was in high school when Dien Bien Phu fell and the teacher had us all bow our heads for the French, the poor French that had been overrun by the Viet Minh.
And so I had no understanding in high school that this was a liberation movement.
By the time I got to college, it became pretty apparent these people were just fighting for their own liberation, their own nationality.
Yeah.
So I got in on the anti-Vietnam War movement pretty early on.
And, and, um, those are elements that were already part of me, but then I was also studying the American theater and, uh, well, Carlos Fuentes is the Mexican novelist I was trying to remember, who became a friend of mine later.
Uh, but I read one of his first novels, uh, in English translation.
Uh, but it was about Mexico city, which was a new experience for me.
And again, one of the formative things that began to form my thoughts.
Right.
Uh, but by the same token, I mean, it, it, it, I became aware then of black people that I had never heard of in high school through my friend, uh, Frank Chichorca who went to Mississippi summer in the summer of 64.
He brought back, he created a comic book of black leaders.
Harriet Tubman, you know, Frederick Douglass, uh, I mean, all the leaders, right?
Marcus Garvey.
Yeah.
Uh, people I had no, no, no chance of learning any about anywhere else, but he had this comic book that he had put together and I saw these figures and they were very heroically drawn.
And I said, this is, this is something else.
This is beautiful.
So in the stacks, I began to look then for black history, trying to find
that vein, it wasn't really obvious then.
It was kind of hidden because it wasn't the time yet.
There weren't African-American studies yet.
The people weren't putting that kind of stuff together.
But I became aware that there was this whole thing that was happening.
Crispus Attucks, the first guy killed in the American Revolution was a black man on the streets of Boston.
And I said, wow, there's a lot of history here.
I've never been taught.
How much of this is also true of the Mexicans?
How much of our history has not been taught?
So then I ran into, in 59, it was republished, North from Mexico, Carrie McWilliams.
Not knowing I was going to meet Carrie also, you know, in due time.
But North from Mexico turned out to be...
a big awakening for me in 1959.
It awakened my Chicano consciousness.
And so even though I couldn't find living, breathing people in my life at that time, they could teach me these things.
I found them in books.
I found them in literature.
I found them in the general life experience, you know, of the civil rights movement.
Right.
Interesting.
Okay, let me think, think, think if there's anything I was going to ask about that.
Well, Lupe had mentioned one of the co-authors, no, sorry, an author of one of those books, Domingo Martinez Paredes.
Domingo Martinez Paredes, yeah.
Yeah.
Had you, um, so prior to like, I don't know, like during that time period as well, the early sixties to 63, 64, had you come across his work or was that something later?
No, not at all.
I don't think that he was even publishing at that time.
Okay.
It, uh, his publications came in the late sixties, but, uh,
And there was a very special way that we connected eventually.
It had to be through the teatro.
It was through the teatro that that experience.
I don't know if you want to talk about that now.
You just want to deal in the 60s, what I was learning.
Yeah, no, I was just curious if that was something that was also like, was that something that you found in the stacks?
You know, like you were talking about, I started to read Los Concelos.
I started to look at Mexican literature.
No, I did not find I did not find Martinez Paredes in the stack.
He wouldn't have been there.
There was no way that anybody was going to pick up those books, you know, and as it is, they were published in paperback in Mexico, he published, you know, through his sources in Mexico.
And we're very fortunate to have copies of his
his work you know uh but the thing is that uh he gave them to me he gave me his books he actually gave me permission to translate his books into english i found it kind of tough going yeah for various reasons his style was kind of non-stop the kind of way i talk like a stream of consciousness yeah uh but we did incorporate the ideas you know i mean i went through his books like
like a gold miner going through finding nuggets for gold, right?
Yeah, everywhere.
Everything's underlined and highlighted.
And then pulling them out and saying, I can use this.
I can incorporate this into the work.
This explains why this is so and why that's so.
Yeah.
And so it was like a revelation to me.
It was really, truly a revelation.
But I'll tell you what happened is that in 1970, we had our first, well, 69, we went to Nancy.
It gave me the idea of a festival.
By 70, we set up our own Chicano Theater Festival in Fresno.
This was in the spring, just a few months later, in the spring of 70.
It so happened it was the day of Kent State, you know, when they murdered the students.
Well, it was the week of Kent State.
And Reagan closed all the state colleges because there were going to be demonstrations.
And that was the weekend that we had planned to have our...
first Chicano theater festival in Fresno.
Uh, I was co-chairman of the La Raza studies.
So we had access to some academic funds and we used those funds.
I was co-chairman with Eliezer Risco.
I mentioned him and, uh, I've been offered the chairmanship of the whole department, but that would have meant sacrificing the teatro and I didn't want to do that.
So Risco came in as the academic, even though he wasn't an academic.
How do you spell Risco?
R-I-S-C-O.
Eliezer.
E-L-I-E-Z-E-R.
He died a couple of years ago, last year in Fresno.
But in any case, we drummed up some money, and it was that money that we used to invite the mascarones.
I literally sent...
We sent $500 in an envelope to Mariano.
I hadn't met Mariano yet.
What happened is that when we were in France at Nancy, the wife of Enrique Buenaventura, a Colombian playwright, who was French, Jacqueline something, came to see the teatro and she says, you know, I love your work.
She said, you remind me very much of Los Mascarones in Mexico.
And I said, who's that?
They say, oh, it's an activist group.
You should know about them.
And so that stuck, Los Mascarones, right?
So when we came back and started organizing our festival, we had a conversation.
I said, you know, we need, it'd be good to have some international presence here.
And we're not a Mexican troupe.
That'd be great.
I've heard about these guys, Los Mascarones, maybe they'll come.
So we drummed up 500 bucks.
I didn't know if that was enough.
It turns out it was.
And so we invited Mariano.
And four of them came, Mariano, Lourdes, Perez Guy, and a couple of others.
Fantasma was another one.
And, and they came and performed at our first festival.
Uh, and they blew us all away.
They blew me away.
I just, because this was like Mexico and there was of course in speaking in Spanish and they had choral poetry.
They were very serious, deadly serious in terms of the work.
So this was the fall.
This is the spring of 70.
So we invited them back in the fall, come back in the fall.
And they came back and they brought Andres Segura, you know, Granados, the maestro de danza, capitán de danza.
Only him with his feathers and his mandolina and la concha.
And it was, again, another revelation to see that, to see someone in full feathers, you know, oh God, Fresno.
I mean saying, God, that just shattered all of these misgivings that I'd had about our Mexican identity since I was a kid.
Suddenly I'm seeing this guy, this warrior in all these feathers, Danzante.
And it just shattered all of that.
It changed the whole perspective, right?
And of course, the danzante tradition is now really dug in all over, right?
Yeah.
But that's because, one is Andres Segura, and the other is Francisco Yescas, who was another one who was in LA at the time.
Trying to go more commercial, quite frankly, but they both had an impact, you know, on the formation of grupos de danza.
And again, I have my own complicated relationship with Andres Segura, but there's no question that he was the maestro brought by the mascarones.
And in 72, when we all went to Mexico City, including your dad, we met
Andres Segura introduced us to Martinez Paredes, Domingo Martinez Paredes.
We went to his house and I was quite taken with him.
I love the old man.
He's a short little Mayan.
And he was duly impressed that we were interested and that we were from the United States.
So man, he showered us.
He gave me his books and showered me with his books.
And so for the next 12 years,
to 84, I think he died in 84.
We, uh, we had a correspondence, you know, we saw him again.
We went back to Mexico.
He wasn't, uh, he was in dire straits, you know, he, he was poor, very, very poor.
He, he existed by writing letters for people that were too illiterate to write their own letters.
He had been a professor at the UNAM, but they drummed him up because he was so critical of
American and British scholars that were coming to put experts on the Mayans.
And he was a Maya Yucateco.
He spoke the language.
He said, these guys don't know what they're talking about.
And, uh, so they drummed him out politically, but his, his ideas I think were absolutely unique, really tremendous, you know, certainly an eye opener for me.
And, uh, I'm only sorry I wasn't able to help him.
uh, before he died, you know, I mean, it would have helped him financially.
We tried to get some monies to him, you know, bring him here again, you know, I would have loved to have brought him here, but none of that was possible.
You know, we were locked into our time, but nevertheless, his ideas remain and they've impacted on my work.
And, and I can see how the whole Densante movement and really the Indigenista aspect of the Chicano movement is still very much alive.
It's still,
very present and even more insistent, you know, on exposing the ideas and concepts that go with it.
I just spoke at the Miami East conference in Texas, right?
No, in Arizona.
And that they brought in scholars from Yucatan to come in and discuss Mayan culture.
And so there are tremendous links that are happening.
Uh, the political situation really isn't much better.
Uh, but those ideas are there, they're alive and present.
And, uh, that's how we connected through it.
You know, it's through the teatro, the connection of the mascarones to directly Martinez Paredes, Domingo Martinez Paredes.
Interesting.
Okay, and one more question in this area.
And that was about, or maybe it's just a clarifying question, but you had talked about when you were kind of, you know, having this convergence of teatro and activism kind of ideas, went in 63, 64, around there.
Before going to the UFW, right?
Before going to Delano.
And you had said that you were influenced by the Jewish tradition.
And the Irish, you know.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And the Irish, too.
And the African-Americans.
You know, these are all different influences, right?
Right.
And so I guess what I'm trying to find out more about that is
Like, was that teatro art, was that the way that you saw, hey, this is the best way I can express how I feel about what's going on, how I can be active, how I can be a participant in this broader movement?
So not necessarily Chicano movement, but
the anti-war movement, the kind of like third world liberation movement that's going on in the 50s and early 60s up until you get to Delano.
Is that kind of inaccurate?
What's the question?
The question is, did you see, like, were you really kind of like more focused on the teatro and art
as being your contribution to those movements.
Yeah, well, I was hooked on the theater.
There's no question that that's what I wanted to do and I've always wanted to do.
In my adult life, I focused on the idea of becoming a playwright.
I had no idea what that would mean in terms of earning a livelihood.
As it's turned out, it's been a way of life for me.
It's been a career.
I have been able to earn a living as a playwright.
Uh, so my dreams have been realized as far as that's concerned.
What it did not mean for me necessarily was the idea of going to Broadway.
I had, I didn't really program that in my consciousness.
I did go to Broadway.
Yeah.
Uh, and I'm thinking it was like going to the moon, you know, and we've never been back, you know, I mean, it, whether once or twice and that was it, you know, but, uh, we went to New York, uh,
as a touring company and found that to be exciting, you know, and then went back.
To conceive of myself as a New York playwright would require that New York City be different than it is.
And it is changing, but I don't think there's been a tremendous reception for Mexicans, you know, in New York.
There certainly wasn't then.
I mean, in 79, when we were there with Zoot Suit, we were
We were a cause celeb when we were there in our first tour, which was in 67.
And, you know, we've made all the national newspapers, the magazines, even television, PBS.
They embraced us as farm workers.
That idea was not a problem.
That was good.
They figured, okay, that matches you guys, Mexicans and farm labor.
Yeah.
All right.
And then Mexican farm workers theater.
Oh, that's even an interesting twist, you know?
So we got very good positive reviews and all the newspapers.
Years later, uh, what would that be?
12 years later, we're back there with Zoot Suit.
Suddenly it's quite the reverse.
They're saying, no, no urban, trying to be theater at the winter garden.
And so even though we got, you know, some positive reviews, for the most part, the major newspapers really slammed us.
You know, they savaged us.
So it's kind of like they were welcoming as long as you knew your place.
Yeah, exactly.
But once you try to come have a seat next to us, no, no, you can't do that.
Come to the big city and come to a flagship like the Winter Garden?
No, you're not ready.
You know, the zoot suit threads are bare, as one newspaper said.
You know, it's not.
You can't make it.
So the idea of, of being a New York playwright, I think is a big challenge for a lot of Latino playwrights, including the contemporary ones, you know, still trying to break through.
Uh, we got to New York, we got to Broadway really based on our success in Los Angeles, you know, which speaks to that emerging to bi-coastal reality of the Americas, right?
That West coast is not East coast and East coast is not West coast.
And who knows when the twain shall meet.
you know, where they meet.
I don't think they meet in Kansas, but maybe Chicago.
But the thing is that, that it was a different reality for us to go.
In any case, that didn't bother me because I had no illusions or dreams or expectations that I could
exist as a playwright on the East Coast.
It was not a way of life.
Why would I go to East Coast anymore than I would go to France or Germany to live, right?
Yeah.
It just seemed like alien, an alien place.
And it was more important for us to really incorporate ourselves into this world on the West Coast and to make California Mexican again, you know, for us.
Yeah.
And also I was aware that this had been Mexico.
And to that extent, also the fact that San Juan Bautista
was one of the capitals of the state.
And I've never liked the idea of being an unwanted visitor, an alien, you know, locked into a barrio or a ghetto, or marginalized.
The idea of being in San Juan Batista gives us a continuity that's been here since the founding of the town, right?
And even before, you know, with the Native Americans that lived here in a little village called Papalachum, because we're Native American too.
And so that continuity is what feeds me.
and what has fed my work and my perspective on the world, all my adult life.
And so the idea of the teatro campesino is like a, it's like a boat out in the middle of the ocean, right?
It keeps you afloat and everything else is water.
Otherwise you got to swim on your own, man.
You're out there and there's a lot of sharks in the water too.
So you got to be very careful.
You should have some kind of float that'll keep you above water for a while.
Yeah.
All right.
Let me move on to my next question.
And this will maybe, maybe not take us down a different kind of direction.
But I want to talk about
How do you understand, or maybe I should say, do you know, what is your concept or understanding of mestizaje or what it means to be mestizo?
What does that mean to you when you hear those words, those ideas?
Mestizaje or mestizo?
Well, I think it's part of a natural process in the world and I mean, in nature that first of all, genetic blending, you know, biological merging is a fact of life.
And even though certain species maintain their characteristics for millennia, nevertheless, there are variations within all these different species.
And the human species itself has had a lot of variations over time.
But we've remained remarkably consistent in terms of our humanity, who we are and what we do with our lives.
And some of these are unchanging.
Like I say, you've got to look at the Eternals.
We all have to eat.
We all have to sleep.
We all have to reproduce.
We all have to, you know, defecate and all that.
Those are ongoing activities that take up a substantial part of our lifetimes.
And then there's the times when all those are settled and then what you do with your mind and what you do with your person is what defines you.
And this is where cultural differences kind of kick in, right?
The genetics and the biology are stable.
And then this other thing begins to give variations and, and
Identity is something that concerns all of us, Chicanos and the whole world, it seems to be.
Everybody's trying to define themselves and say, okay, I'm from here.
This is who I am.
But I think it's part of a process.
It's not for all time.
I think your identity is more of a moving fluid thing that can change very gradually.
To just say that somebody is American, for instance,
It's a very complicated question.
What defines an American?
And you may give some very different views as to what an American is.
The stereotype is blonde, blue-eyed, you know, Hollywood type.
That's an American.
And that's not true.
I mean, that's shifted even within the white community.
And now, I mean, it includes everybody.
It includes any race, any background.
As far as some people are concerned, anybody can be an American.
That's part of the myth.
That's part of the dream, right?
And I think, I love that.
I think that, but the same thing goes for other nationalities that get very closely identified with race.
What is a Mexican?
When you finally get down to it, not all Mexicans are Mexica, meaning that they're, they're born of that Aztec tribe, right?
The Mexica tribe.
Uh, uh,
There are Otomis, there are Yaquis, there are Tarumaras, there are different kinds of Maya, you know, from different, with different dialects, you know, Tsetzal, Chontal, all these different kinds of variations of the language.
And even of the biological, I might say, details that have been shifted.
So the idea of a Mexican identity is a concoction.
It's a creation.
that came out of the Spanish conquest of the tribes that were here, and then the imposition of a national identity called Mexico, which not all Mexicans identify with, you know, not all indígenas identify with, they understand what it is.
In my case, in my background, the Yaquis fought against the Mexicans for 400 years, okay?
from 1528 until 1937, they didn't even identify themselves as Mexicans.
When my family and possibly yours came across the border, and probably yours, not just possibly, probably, they went from being Indians, Indios, to begin Mexicans, to being Mexicans, you know, which they weren't in Mexico.
They weren't even considered Mexico.
They were Mexicans, they were Indians.
And so it's a really complicated question when you start talking about identity and how that defines itself, because it's always in motion.
And again, it moves slowly, but if you study your history, if you know your history and you begin to lay out the centuries, you can see how it has shifted, how it has transformed from one thing into the other.
And, and the, our concept of white people today is different than it was even just a century ago, 50 years ago.
And, uh, white people were the norm, you know, they were the standard.
They were the, they were the human standard.
Everybody else was either sub, you know, or variations of, of, of whatever.
That's no longer the case.
I think we are beginning to see the world with very different eyes.
We see what the Chinese have done and how old Chinese civilization is and how their brilliance has manifested itself over millennia.
And you could say the same thing about the Mayas and you could say the same thing about the Ormecas.
That was brilliance that manifested itself when people were living in caves in Europe, right?
It's how, again,
It's something that is still fluid.
They recently made another discovery of a rock, you know, that had been worked over by human hands.
The rock was 130,000 years old, you know, so that means, wait a minute, does that mean people were here 130?
Where did they come from?
So that's the whole question.
All of that is subject to change.
So our perspective on who we are continues to change.
Yeah.
I think...
For me, what makes sense eventually is can you reduce it down to some algorithms, some principles that allow us to live at peace with each other and not really screw anybody over?
And this is where notions of democracy and the notions of cultural exchange come into being.
And these are really important.
Cultural fusion, I think it's important.
That you absorb what you can from others around you and become part of the mass.
without becoming a blob that you be, you're still an individual, but you're able to selectively draw the positives, you know, from the people around you.
So by that token, then you could say that we've all become more Asian, more African-American, more European, more indigenous.
uh, than ever before that we're exchanging these values and cultural traits at an astounding rate.
It's going really fast and, and faster than ever before.
And so how do you define all of that?
Does Mexican say it?
Um,
Well, yeah, within certain limits.
Yeah, we still know what a Mexican is, of course, you know.
But how do you distinguish between a Mexican and Honduran or a Guatemalan?
It gets really tricky.
You go way down there, you say, well, I don't know the difference between a Maya Yucateco and a Maya Guatemalteco.
You know, what's the difference?
There are more differences, there are more similarities between those two groups than there are, say, between the Mexicans and the far northern area in the deserts.
Yeah.
or Prietos as the case may be, but they're closer to the United States.
So their whole approach to reality is a lot more common with America, with the United States, right?
Not America, the United States.
So you've got this vast spectrum, right?
And I mean, I'm working on a new piece about the Filipinos, you know, but I'm realizing we have an awful lot of similarities with the Filipinos because of
the last 300, 400 years, you know, of contact.
But there's still, you can still identify Filipinos and Mexicans.
There's still differences.
You can say, although there are some people, they can't tell the difference.
I don't know the difference between a Filipino and a Mexican, even though they're separated by the Pacific Ocean, if you know what I'm saying.
Yeah.
Like, phenotypically, you're saying...
It's like a Mexican or a Chicano or a Chicana going to Spain, as Lupe and I have been in Spain, and you get confused because here are the Españoles and they look like your tios and tias.
Say, wait a minute, that face, that voice, that manner of speaking, that sounds like my family.
So what part of me is Spanish?
And then by the same token, then what part of me is European?
I not only have a foothold in Europe,
Europe is in me.
I carry Europe.
You know, that's not so strange.
And then we're beginning to discover, well, we're also African, man.
We've had an awful lot of influence coming from Africa.
And I'm not just talking rock and roll.
We're talking genetics.
We're talking culture.
We're talking about immigration coming from Africa to the new world way before the Europeans got here, as people are finding out.
What defines culture?
What defines identity?
There are elements that can be traced to this very moment, but you can also accept the fact that this will change in relative terms.
It's like the weather, you know, it will continue to change and there'll be rising and falling actions.
In most cases, I guess what you really have to look at is what's the tendency?
Que es la tendencia?
You know, where is it going?
Yeah.
Where is it trending toward?
And I think a lot of the racism that we're seeing in our time,
is, uh, is there to stay in some instances, but it's also there to disappear.
It will disappear in time.
It, it, it's a passing of generations, you know, whether people will ever get over their genetic and racial differences.
I doubt it.
Frankly, I think that, you know, we're just too contrary and we love to build barriers and create tribes and we're cliquish.
And so we create cliquas and, you know, inferior, superior, that's just a
a mind a human mind game that goes on and on and on but can it get better generally speaking for most people probably yeah i think the curve of the world does go up it toward progress you know and i mean i'm not a fool uh there are evils in the world there's murder there's all kinds of shit we may have a massive world war you know that will destroy millions despite that i think climate crisis
Well, just the planet itself will shake us all off like fleas, you know what I'm saying?
You know what, you guys bug me.
Yeah.
Let me ask you a little bit more about that idea of cultural fusion that you were just talking about.
And do you think that that was something that you picked up from Vasconcelos?
Because Vasconcelos talks about that in Raza Cosmica, right?
And that this idea of this fusion of these two cultures, right?
These cultures, these races in Mexico.
I mean, as far as I know, he doesn't really talk a lot about the Afro world.
No, he wouldn't talk about the Afro.
Yeah, no.
He wouldn't know.
He was a white man.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But, yeah, so is that something that, like, that understanding that you have when you're thinking about mestizaje and mestizo, that idea of the cultural fusion, is that something that you think maybe picked up from Vasconcelos?
You know, I think we're all mestizos.
Yeah.
Every single human...
on the planet, Ms.
Diesel, some kind, you know, you picked up from your ancestors, we picked up from the people that have been here before us.
And so we fuse those things into our being and we put new names on it, new tags, and say, okay, this is who I am.
But I think what Vasconcelos was describing was a particular event, historical event, massive as it was, you know, in Mexico, that
can be duplicated with other cultures and other peoples in other parts of the world, you know, going way back millennia, even the migration of human beings out of Africa, you know, uh, you know, they're saying 50, 60, 60, 70, 80, thousand years ago, you know, uh, produced the phenomenon, the cultural fusion, uh, you know, the Neanderthals and the Denisovans and the humans, you know, the homo sapiens,
eventually had cultural and biological fusion.
They're discovering that now that the Neanderthals did not completely disappear.
They, they integrated, they bred in with the, with the Homo Zabians.
Yeah.
And some people would agree and say, well, look at those Neanderthals.
You look like Neanderthals to me.
Depending on who you're talking about, you know, but, but the thing is that, that, um,
What it really raises the question is that we don't know everything we need to know.
We don't know everything we're going to know, you know, in due time, but let's keep learning.
Let's keep doing the research.
Let's keep the doors open.
Let's not lock it up and say, okay, this is what it is and always will be.
No, sir.
You know, it depends on your place in time.
White people may seem to be the top of the heap right now.
That wasn't always the case.
That wasn't during the ice age, which is 15,000 years ago.
all of Europe, all of Northern Europe was ice.
All the United States, New York City was under ice.
There was a blanket of glaciers.
So what was culture at that time?
Well, culture was to be brown, to be in the sun, to be close to the equator and to wear very little clothes.
Not big, willing clothes, you know, big cloaks of animal skins and stuff, you know, which is barbaric.
But to be very live and very free and open
and let the air breathe.
Like the Egyptians now, you wear clothes.
And like the Maya, you know, you wear almost translucent clothing so that your skin can breathe.
And of course, you're brown because the sun bakes you that way.
That's why.
Because you live in the sunbelt.
But the sunbelt is also what makes you brilliant and intelligent.
Now we live in a time where the opposite, you know, if you go to the northern climes, you get more intelligent people.
And that's just a prejudice of our times.
It evolved in the last 15,000 years, I'm sure, but when the glaciers started to withdraw, then we got cities, then we got habitations that had to be enclosed so you could have a fire and you warm up and people could survive in that way.
I don't mind that.
I think we have to live all over the planet and you should learn how to live all over the planet, cold as well as hot.
But the fact is that
It's like a scientific, maybe this is where the physicist in me is reaffirming itself, is that you have to take a long view.
You have to look a long view to understand what the patterns are and to see what has happened so that you can understand much better what it is that's happening in your own time.
Because your limited timeframe of one lifetime at any time is too small.
You won't learn anything that way, you know, except...
except very basic stuff that you need to know in terms of survival.
But if you really want to understand what the whole process is about, what your humanity is about, take the long view.
So for me, the study of history and particularly the study of cultural history, not the history that people write for themselves to make themselves appear more brilliant, more powerful than theirs, but the real history, right?
What are the artifacts?
What do we have before us?
Uh, what is the evidence of human survival?
And, and I think that a lot of us that are brown people in, in the Americas are the survivors of some horrendous events, not just human genocide, but, uh, smallpox, the way it decimated millions and millions of our ancestors, right?
90% of our ancestors were all survivors over here.
Yeah.
And, um, so what we have to contribute, um,
is very, very precious because otherwise it would have been totally lost if it weren't for us.
And it exists in our genes.
It exists in our minds.
It exists in our imaginations.
And so part of the process of the arts, this is why I'm an artist, is that you draw from your subconscious.
You draw almost from your genetic makeup to come up with images that
seem familiar because they were there a long time ago, right?
They reaffirmed themselves.
And that to me is the constant search for this identity.
Again, emotion, not a fixed item, not a fixed thing, but a tendency, a wave.
What is the wave and where are we on the wave?
Right, right.
So talking about mestizaje or mestizo,
um like i i get the kind of um you know we are everybody everybody is misty so in some way or another right there's no such thing as pure pure pure blood right um like that in itself that's a that's an ideology right um
It's a scientific fact, actually.
I think it's a scientific fact.
It can be reduced down to science.
Oh, about the mixed web.
Genetic makeup.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, right, right, right.
But so I think, like, so the picture that you're painting right now is one of kind of like a general...
like what is mestizo right everybody is mestizo everybody is a mix and you're taking that long view of it right and I'm kind of curious what is your because it is something that is present in or around the Chicano community especially now but I mean this is something Vasconcelos is writing about it
In the 20s, after the revolution, Corky Gonzalez is writing, you know, writing stuff about this.
Yeah, we're both conquered and conqueror.
Yeah.
And I think you had mentioned something about it, too.
And I don't know.
I don't think it was in reference to any of the actos, but maybe like when you were doing, you know, the library, the library work, the books that you were reading in there.
or in your, you know, when you were writing the machete column.
But is there, so you talked about we're a product of the conqueror or we're the conqueror and the conqueror.
Well, that's Corky Gonzalez and I'm Joaquin, right?
He says we're both the conqueror and the conquered.
Mm-hmm.
Because of, again, the mestizo, the mestizake.
Right.
And there is a contradiction there that is very, very big.
It does tend to split us into different camps.
Part of my solution there is to embrace it all.
I should say, okay, I identify with the human race, and I want to see where it all goes.
Uh, and so again, depending on what group you're studying now with Mexico and Mexico, you've got a substantial landmass, you know, three times the size of France there.
And, and, uh, it's a huge area.
And at the time of the ice age, there's a reason why the high cultures were in Mesoamerica, because that was one of the few places that could sustain civilized life.
was down there in that branch, in that belt.
And not just the Egyptian, but also the Maya and the Olmecas, you know, and you could survive because it was warm and there was food and there were animals and, and that's, it was reality.
It wasn't snow.
On the other hand, I mean, there are different places in the world that have dealt with those conditions in their own ways and created their own histories.
China.
You know, it's right there and there's Mongolia and then there's Russia and Siberia.
So all that ice came down, you know, I'm sure into China at some point.
And so where Chinese civilization started is a question.
I don't know.
I would like to know.
I'm studying Asia.
I'm trying to understand that whole section of the world just as a human being.
I need to know more about Asians, right?
I mean, the breakdown and not just the ones that went China and Japan and Korea that we know about, but also
the smaller cultures, you know, particularly since supposedly as the calendar goes, humanity was there.
Before we were here.
Yeah.
And so, and if you believe the anthropologists, we came from there.
So all the native Americans eventually crossed over the Bering Strait supposedly 20,000 years ago.
Yeah.
And maybe even longer, you know, maybe even before that, when there was a land bridge.
So that makes us deeply at some root Asian.
Yeah.
So how do we understand that about ourselves?
How can we understand that?
And.
And it's just not an affinity for sushi or Chinese food.
It's deeper than that.
But you begin by trying to understand how they got there to begin with.
How did that work out?
We know more about Europe because Europe has always put such a light on itself and everybody studies Europe.
Yeah.
But deepest, darkest Africa is dark because no one's really studied it beyond the people that are there, you know?
But if we came from there, why don't we know more about it?
Why don't we know more about the ancient cultures of Africa?
You know, or you see...
you know, the Congresswoman is being attacked, you know, from Somalia, you know, I mean, her face, Ilan, what's your name?
Omar.
Yeah.
I mean, her face is beautiful.
These are very fine features.
You know, the Somali are like Ethiopians, you know, that part of Africa is...
You say, well, that's not your stereotypical African, yet she's African.
Yeah.
She's dark-skinned, but that's not the only happening there.
Look at the eyes, look at the nose, look at the softness of the skin and the look and the hair.
I mean, you begin, okay, there's a misty sake happening right before your very eyes, you know?
Yeah.
And so I don't, it takes enormous ignorance to discount all of that and say, okay, I don't know who she is.
But for me, what that does is it raises questions of what is their history?
I want to know more about how they got to be, you know, and there's the... I just got to start the recording again.
There we go.
Oh, I see.
It told you that, okay.
It stops it and then you have to restart it.
Yeah.
So Ilhan Omar, I mean, is...
But you look at AOC, Alejandro Castro Cortes, and you see her features, and the thin-faced women, there's some similarities.
Some people wouldn't be able to tell the difference between them, and yet there's AOC, and she's supposed to be, what, Puerto Rican or whatever.
But okay, what you need is a different appreciation then for what people are and where they come from and how they got their traits.
That requires a more global understanding.
I think that the more we understand about the world, the way we're understanding how the weather's connected, that the wind is blowing around the whole planet and that our weather is related to the weather at the other side of the planet, so too our genetic history, our makeup, and what we do is related to what's happening at the other side of the planet.
And it's important for us to know.
what people eat, what they sleep, how they dream, all of that is related to the way I sleep, the way I dream, you know?
And, uh, but in order to be able to get there, people have to jump over tremendous barriers that are put there to ignorance and racism and, uh, prejudices of different kinds, right?
Fears.
And so, uh, I would say that, uh, you either embrace the whole human race or, or you don't, and if you don't, then
You wouldn't understand who you are.
There's no way.
You've got to embrace the whole human race.
It's all you.
It's all us.
Yeah.
To go back to the Mesisahes stuff, as you were reading, because I don't think I need to ask you, like, oh, where do you think you learned about this?
I think we kind of talked about that, you know.
already um but did you ever uh identify as that you know like we were talking about quirky and identify as what mestizaje or mestizo
Because part of what you were talking about in terms of the Chicano movement and your activities in it was to help establish an identity, right?
And so was that part of that identity, like that identity formation was part of it, including this idea of mestizo or mestizaje at that time period?
So like when you were first starting to...
Well, I think, I mean, the ideas of Lermachete eventually coalesced into an article I wrote for Ramparts Magazine called A Tale of La Raza that was published in 66 out of San Francisco.
And there were two, one was, there was an article about Teatro Campesino as well, but Tale of La Raza was really my
my philosophical underpinning, right?
And they published it.
And again, I was drawing from all of these ideas that I've been tapping into and exposing in the Machete papers.
And so I had to do something with that.
And it turns out that this was an opportunity.
So those ideas have not changed.
I would say that I can subscribe to, unless I'm forgetting some stuff here, but I really believe that
that I made a statement at that time that makes sense.
And you know, I kept notebooks, I kept journals when I was in college, and there are ideas that I wrote when I was 20 years old that still make sense to me, you know?
These were formative principles that I was laying down for myself, and there's been no reason for me to change them.
Some of them are really way out there.
They're spiritual, almost deeply philosophical, because I was a philosophy minor as well.
So I was trying to jot down my philosophical ideas, but eventually this was like a proclamation of my basic principles.
And I think it is, well, it makes a difference what you're pinning yourself to, you know, what is it that you are subscribing to?
And the big question ultimately that defines me,
and anybody else really, but me, as far as I'm concerned, is what is the nature of life and death?
You know, why are we here to begin with?
And there's no particular answer that's gonna answer it all that's gonna satisfy that question.
There's no particular race, there's no particular success of any kind, political, economic, artistic, that answers the question.
Because you're still going to die.
So what is the meaning of life then if we die?
Where's the life force?
And the only answer that I can come up with at this point is not to think of me as an individual, but part of a mass, part of the human race.
The human race will go on.
And it's important for the human race to go on.
And within that, of course, your race, your relatives, your people, whoever they may be,
You want to help them out.
You want to help that to preserve and to continue.
But there's no need for every one of us to go on forever as we are, because we're creatures created in time.
And so again, there's the spectrum, there's the long view.
And I take the long view always, when push comes to shove, I have to go to the long view because death imposes that on us.
It imposes the long view on us, whether we like it or not, because it's serious.
Death is serious, you know, it's forever.
So then how do we deal with forever?
Well, the only possibility is the longest living thing that you can hold onto, and that's your people, your race, your human, your species, the planet.
If we destroy the planet, we're all screwed, you know?
And so then maybe you have to look out to the stars and say, I don't know who's out there, but I hope somebody else is out there.
But the fact is that, that's why if you contemplate your own life and death, it seems to me that the notion of killing somebody else becomes absurd.
Why would you want to do that?
Why would you want to deprive somebody of their life?
when you hold on to your own so desperately.
And yet it happens all the time that people do that and they block that out and they go out and start killing people.
And you say, well, then we have some very diseased people among us, you know, that need to be dealt with on some level without killing them too, neutralizing them.
Yeah, I think part of that, I mean, and it's what you're talking about is what worldview are you living, right?
What are the principles and things that you value that you are moving through the world with, right?
So if you have those values where you respect the time that you have here,
you're not going to deprive that from somebody else.
But if you don't respect that, if you don't have any respect for yourself, for others, for the earth, then you're going to, you're going to, you're going to do stuff like that.
Right.
Yeah.
I think, you know, the objective reality that we all call reality, you know, is, it doesn't really exist.
It exists in our minds and that what reality is,
consists of is a series of algorithms.
These are mathematical probabilities that continue to happen.
When you have these elements in motion and they come together in a certain way, then this is probably the outcome.
And again, there's no way of knowing for sure, but it's probability.
It's a mathematical equation.
So at the basis of it all is math.
And I was a mathematics major, you see.
So I go back down to this play of numbers, of digits in our life, manifests itself into the elements of our life, the things that we love and we see and we eat and taste.
These are all, part of the phenomenon, the shape-shifting phenomenon of life is this play of numbers, of mathematical equations that are
They're the ultimate composition of the universe.
And, um, maybe that's, that's the way to explain it too.
You have to go back to math major me, you know, and say, okay, this is, uh, this is why I love math.
I loved it.
I love, I love the cert certainty of it.
At the same time, I love the openness of it that you could just, the numbers, you know, that you could, the numbers go, man.
They just, it's, uh, they're infinite.
Yeah.
They go to infinity.
Exactly.
I was going to ask you the essay, A Tale of La Raza, is that something that's in print somewhere?
Yeah, Ramparts Magazine.
Oh, Ramparts Magazine.
Ramparts Magazine, 1966.
So if I Google it, I can find it?
Yeah.
Magazine.
And then what I was going to ask you about is all of these things that you discuss in this essay,
And these kind of principles or values that you are discovering about yourself and about your people and this and that.
Was that something you were, like, alone on?
Or was it that... Because on the one hand, you're saying, look, prior to 1960, we'll say, there wasn't any...
There was a lack of knowledge about our history and our identity and who we were and our place, right?
And then you are starting to develop these ideas, right, of who we are, of our history.
Not that you're making them up, but that you're doing the historical research.
You're learning more, right?
And so is this a solo journey or are you meeting people...
who are like, yeah, I, I agree with that too.
Or yeah, I came up with that on my own or, you know, like, was there a convergence of when you went to do the, the tour, that first tour, right.
And you said that you went and you met, um, like Corky Gonzalez, right.
Uh, are you talking with him?
And like, it turns out you guys have the same ideas.
Like, do you know what I mean?
Or.
Yeah.
I mean, yeah, there was, uh,
Yeah, coming together based on connections, right?
In activism, on the one hand, the quirky was busy already.
He had the Crusade for Justice going.
He was a playwright too, which was really good, you know?
I guess he could have become a serious playwright, but he had other things that he was doing.
He'd been a boxer, you know?
He was also older, a lot older than me.
Uh, he was more a contemporary of, of Cesar Chavez.
So he was born in the late twenties, I think 28, 29, something like that.
And so he was in college in the forties, which was really unusual.
Even a junior college in Denver for a Chicano to be a college student and then to be a golden gloves champion with his fists.
And he's an intellectual, you know?
Yeah.
Uh, I, all of that was admirable stuff for me.
I, I, uh, I have cousins that became boxers, but, um, they weren't intellectuals, you know, so there's Corky, you know, holding his own.
And so, uh, and I think we saw each other as contempos in that sense.
Oh, we're sharing a lot of similar ideas here.
You're doing theater and, you know, um,
Again, these were different people and he was a leader in Denver.
He's acknowledged more as a civil rights leader than as a writer, except for Ian Joaquin.
His plays, I don't know, have not gotten a lot of play, you know, but he wrote two, I think.
But we did see, they performed his play at the same time we did actos, you know, in Denver when we met.
Before that, well, I had a friend also in college, Roberto Rubalcaba, you know, that was my sounding board.
He became my compadre eventually.
We went to Cuba together.
So my political concepts found a kindred spirit in Roberto.
And we started calling ourselves Chicanos, given our background.
He was from Santa Ana in LA.
And kind of a tough upbringing.
His mother and father were divorced, essentially, and I met them both.
The mother was up here with him.
He came to see me the day that she died.
And she was a bit of an alcoholic, I believe, you know.
And I met his father too, back in Santana.
Uh, and the father was a stone cold campesino.
I mean, strict, not very open at all.
And these traits kind of transferred into Roberto, you know, cause he was a charmer.
He was a gentleman, but he could cold very quickly.
Yeah.
Um, Is he still alive?
Oh yeah.
He, he, yeah.
In Santa Cruz.
Cause I was trying to look up, uh, my mom had mentioned his name.
She said, oh, you might want to reach out to him and see if he would be interested in doing the interview.
And I couldn't find him anywhere.
And she says, ask Luis.
He would probably know.
Well, he... It's a very complicated relationship, right?
Because he... He divorced our comadre.
I mean, we were comadre compadres, you know, but he was a comadre and she died of cancer.
Lovely woman.
But his behavior is hot and cold.
When he goes cold, he goes cold with his children and everybody.
It's been a very difficult relationship.
I lost track the last 20 years.
I haven't really had much contact with him.
I heard he had prostate cancer that he was fighting.
I think he's still alive.
I'm pretty sure he's still alive.
And that he's in Santa Cruz.
That's all I can tell you.
Maybe someone else can find him.
He had a series of clinics going there for a while.
Let me see if there's anything else.
I think the last thing I want to ask you about is because when I talked to my mom and my dad about this, one of the things that they had mentioned was that this idea or concept of mestizaje and mestizo was something that was just like people knew about it.
So it wasn't like it was...
you know, you went into a class and you learned about, like, white privilege, right?
Like, that it was something that people just kind of knew about.
And one of the things that they had both kind of related it to was, like, being in the Catholic Church and seeing, like, the Vidhin, right?
And my dad was telling this story about, he said, I remember...
This one time I was in like catechism and I asked the nun, why is there a brown Mary and a white Mary?
He said that the nun hit him, right?
And that he's always associated it with that, that pain.
So that he was like, he's like, well, I don't know what this like this white Indian thing is, but I don't know.
I'm not into it.
So I was just curious if you were familiar or do you think you had encountered it prior to you reading, you know, rebelling against your brother and wanting to be more Mexican?
I knew about the Mexican Revolution from childhood.
There was talk.
As a matter of fact, when we used to go work in the fields...
My mother had a cry and she got from her father.
A Rivera, a Madero lo han matado.
So you're working, you're five, six years old, you know, and your mother's saying, a Rivera, a Madero lo han matado.
What the fuck does that mean?
A Rivera means get up, you know, a Madero, they've killed Madero.
I said, who's Madero?
It's Francisco Madero.
This is a rallying cry that obviously comes from 1911 when Francisco Madero was assassinated in Mexico City.
It would have come through my grandfather because my grandfather, again, like a lot of grandfathers, was a participant in the Mexican revolution, pero de lejos, you know what I mean?
He didn't spend too much time.
He came north.
But he and his brother actually were vaqueros and they did
joined some troop there for a while, and then they left, you know, went north into Arizona.
But the thing is that the talk of the Mexican Pancho Villa was, was very real.
I, to me, he was a real person, you know, in this one time when I was a little kid, my relatives, my tios would talk about the Villistas and the Mexican revolution.
In 1952,
A movie came to our, my own town, Ernie Mart at the time, you know, and our, our movie theater, which was only two years old at the time.
It was established in 1950.
Yeah.
Um, was a Quonset hut, was a big Quonset hut, you know, one of those folded, uh, corrugated tin houses.
And there was no billboard to put up the poster of the next movie.
So they put it on the sidewalk in front of the movie theater.
So you can walk all over it.
And the movie was Viva Zapata.
And I'll never forget.
in front of the movie theater there on the sidewalk was Marlon Brando's face, you know, I used to walk all over it.
And then there's these letters, Viva Zapata.
And I said, wow, I'd never heard of Zapata until 1952.
And I said, I got to see this.
And so I saw the movie and was blown out.
I said, Zapata, I got to know more about Zapata.
And so, but he, that formulated
It's not a bad movie, it still holds up.
It's not historically accurate, you know, but nevertheless, um, I was very impressed.
And so I was 12 years old and I distinctly remember wanting to know more about Zapata and asking.
No one really could give me too much information about Zapata.
But we did have 16th of September celebrations in Delano and they bring out the tribuna.
which was a stage on automobile tire wheels, you know, they'd put out in the middle of the street and then they'd have the musicians and the oradores, you know, the people giving the speeches up there, the red, green and white bunting, you know, again, very festive, but people up, they had a group of men and women up on the stage and these were all people that had fought in the Mexican revolution.
And again, I don't know how it was, 10, 11, 9, 10.
And I remember thinking, they were saying, no, mira, estos, estas gente pelearon con Pancho Villa, you know?
And it was real to me because these were real, right?
And as it turns out, one of my uncles had ridden with Pancho Villa, you know?
And, and, and mi tío Güero, and he turned out to be one of the huelguistas in Delano in his old age.
But, um, my tío Güero was from Zacatecas.
So it made perfect sense that it would have been
as a teenager, you know, involved in the revolution.
So the revolution was not something that was far away.
The revolution was something that was in my family, that was part of my history.
So the idea of revolution was still alive.
And I think that for a lot of Chicanos, we share that, that that was heritage that was given.
So when the idea of the Cuban revolution came around, for instance, and I went to Cuba,
I felt it was a reaffirmation of my past.
I was experiencing another Latino revolution, right?
I mean, there it is, la revolucion.
It made sense to me.
And la revolucion is something that I could talk about even as a little kid because it had been a reality and that all these people working in the field, some of them had been revolutionaries.
So it's not so far-fetched, you know.
As I have learned over the years in studying it, I've learned that
The ideology and these ideas really have deep roots and they go way back.
And I mean, the ideas of Ricardo and Enrique Flores Magón, the ideologues in the Mexican Revolution.
They had a newspaper called Regeneracion that was published in Los Angeles in 1911.
Ricardo Flores Magón died at Fort Leavenworth on a hunger strike protesting World War I. He starved to death.
protesting World War I, which I found really, when I found out about that, I said, that's amazing.
But not just that, it's the fact that these ideas have been carried along from generation to generation and passed on in a number of different ways.
And I have since done research, like for Carlotta, Adios Mama Carlotta, in my last play,
I read a book that had been published in 1905 in Spanish about Benito Juarez.
And I had to, I bought it through Amazon Books.
I mean, I had found it and it was a rare copy, but I bought it and I'm glad I did because I learned some incredibly important things about Benito Juarez, you know, through this book published in 1905, again, in honor of
Must have been the 35th anniversary of his death at the time.
So 1905.
And there it is.
And so every time that I've gone into history to study something, I see these connections.
And so I realized that my ideas came through my relatives.
How much I absorbed from my tios and tias is significant because it laid the groundwork for me.
And I was able, again, as a young adult, to be able to take these ideas and find other sources and add to it and keep it moving and pass it on, right?
Pass it on to the next generation.
Keep passing it on.
And again, it speaks about the continuity and the river.
It's the river of human consciousness.
And you've got to relate to the river.
Don't think that just because where you are is where it's always been.
No, no, no.
The ideas keep flowing.
They keep moving.
And so in that sense...
Uh, I'm grateful to the ideologues in my family.
They didn't have much education, unfortunately, but they had experiences and they had personal histories and I related to those personal histories.
The Mexican revolution was as connected to me as my grandparents and my grandfather on my father's side, uh, was in the Huelga de Cananea in 1905.
Uh, in, in Northern part of Mexico, in Sonora, right across the border from Arizona.
As a matter of fact, Cananea, the mine was owned by Phelps Dodge Corporation out of, out of Tucson and Phoenix.
And, um, Cananea, the strike at Cananea in 1905 was the opening shot of the Mexican revolution.
So my grandfather was blackballed, you know, he was a teenager, but he was blackballed for being in the strike.
So he went to work for the Perros Carriles Nacionales de Mexico, you know, the National Railroad, laying crack into Nogales.
And then in Nogales, he worked in the roundhouse.
And it was a point of pride in my family that my grandfather could
would drive the engine into the roundhouse, you know, for repairs that he could do that, that he could drive the engine, you know, that was a big deal in those days.
So I was, I used to envision that saying, wow, that was wonderful.
That was great.
It was important.
Actually, he was just a laborer, but, but, uh,
But I have a picture of him and I look like him.
My dad used to say, you look like my father.
And I'd say, well, I do.
But it turns out, yeah, I was, all my brothers and sisters looked like my grandfather.
But we have his face, you know, we have his manner.
I have his height.
He was like me.
So I not only think about his involvement in the revolution, I also think about his involvement possibly in the Yaki Easter ceremony as an actor.
I don't know that for sure.
I know it only instinctively.
Yeah.
Once I saw the Yaki Easter ceremony in 1999 in Sonora, I realized these are the roots of the teatro.
I said, this is where the Teatro Camposino, genetic memory again, you know, memoria genética.
I never got to see my grandfather because he died in 1924, 16 years before I was born.
But the genes were there.
They came in through.
So in a way, the lessons came through my dad, you know, and came to me.
Again, one grandfather and then other lessons from the other grandfather and grandmothers and boom, you know, it becomes something in this lifetime.
Right.
And so I'm just aware that there was a lot more discussion and intellectual conversation going on at that time.
It's not all dark night, you know, it's all not just ignorance.
There's a lot of sensibility and a lot of intellectuality that was coming from Mexico in ways that I never suspected when I was a kid.
So something really interesting you said, and I think this will be my last question because I know we're over our two hour limit, but
One of the things you were talking about is, you know, that even you have a connection to the Mexican Revolution.
Yeah.
Right.
And one of the things I was mentioning about my project is that gap, right?
The gap between the Mexican Revolution and the Chicano movement.
And it sounds almost like what you're saying is, well, actually, there is no gap.
There is no gap.
Right?
Right.
Yeah, so, okay, I just want to, like, am I tripping on this stuff?
No, no, and the Chicano movement, and particularly with the involvement of the teatro, okay, directly inspired by the Mexican Revolution in the 1920s.
I know that for a fact because I was there.
And, I mean, it was a conscious act on my part.
When we set up the Centro Cambesino Cultural in Del Rey, uh,
We created the first Chicano murals.
Antonio Bernal, who was a member of the Teatro at the time, was also a painter.
So he painted the murals on plywood, four by eight plywood sheets, which we put over the windows of this storefront.
And they've been officially acknowledged as the first Chicano murals.
1968.
But what we were doing there is imitating the Mexican revolution.
And it's the same way too, with the gritos.
When I went to Delano, they used to do a few vivas.
There's no question about it.
But when I came in with the teatro, we pumped that up.
Okay.
The vivas came up and I was reaching back to
the 16th September celebration I'd seen as a kid with all these Mexican revolutionaries up there on the stage shouting viva Zapata, viva Villa, viva la revolucion.
And so as a little kid, I was up there, viva la revolucion.
So by the time I was in my twenties and came to Delano and I have a real live strike on my hands, you know, and I'm able then to maneuver myself to the place where I'm leading gritos and chants on the picket line and in the meetings.
It was a very receptive atmosphere.
I wasn't the only one doing it, but I found that I could do it with complete freedom, right?
That people applauded it, that that's what they wanted.
And so the idea then of introducing that kind of verb into the huelga became the role of the teatro, and we included corridos, okay, huelga en general, you know, which is...
a song I'd heard in Cuba, which I just translated into the Mexican to the strike.
Right.
A lot of people got the Chicano clap.
I learned it in Cuba.
I picked it up in Cuba and I brought it to the Huelga meeting.
Un aplauso organizado.
Man, Caesar loved it.
So they're still doing it, right?
They don't know where it comes from.
Well, it's connected.
It comes to Cuba.
You know?
And it's not communist.
It just is what it is, right?
Yeah.
It's part of the genetic memory.
Exactly.
the the roots of revolution you know are there and it the idea of revolution for mexicans is different than what it is for a lot of americans when americans think of the american revolution you think back to the times of abraham lincoln and not you know george washington and thomas jefferson you have to go back to the american revolution with lincoln of course it's a civil war but but with mexico
The revolution was our grandparents.
The Mexican revolution was there, you know, and it became institutionalized unfortunately in Mexico with a pre, you know, and it led to corruption.
But the idea when I was a kid and growing up and into the sixties, it was a living, breathing heritage that I wanted to see live again.
And it lived again.
It became real.
So you know how you were talking about the Chicano clap and the huelga and stuff like that?
Do you think that's also, you know, this same kind of trend with the Vigen, right?
They're using the Vigen as like their banner during the march.
Same thing in the Mexican Revolution, right?
Well, this goes all the way back to 1810 with Father Hidalgo.
He's the one that picked up the image of the Vigen of Guadalupe and marched with it.
So there's that connection there.
It's like the, the Chicano movement, the grape strike is drawing on that, that those messages from the Mexican revolution, which is drawing on the messages from the independence.
Right.
And I remember as a kid again in Delano is El Dia de la Virgen, which was in December, right?
December 12th, 9th through the 12th, the apparitions, little kids would come
to church with their parents dressed as Juan Diego.
In other words, little white calzon blanco with a manta, the tirma, with a virgen on it.
And they hold it out.
And I remember thinking, oh man, I want one of those.
Because I love costumes already, right?
But I'm saying, wow, man, I should have had one of those.
But my mom, you know, again, for one reason or another, never made one for me.
But I never forgot that.
I was saying, you know, yeah.
So when we came to San Juan and had the opportunity to do the Virgen of Guadalupe as a play, again, you reach into your memories.
Yeah.
And I remember that image of Juan Guillermo and I said, okay, this has definite appeal on a lot of levels.
Of course, for all Mexicanos, the Virgen is very special.
Yeah.
For reasons they don't even understand, you know.
Right.
They don't even understand exactly why, but this is primordial.
It is deep.
But for me, it meant that this is something that can actually manifest, that can actually become visible.
And the Wilhelm play then, Jorge Huerta sent me this play with four characters.
It was a liturgy.
Yeah.
And I said, well, this is a start.
So we started here at the teatro, at the Jardines with a four character play and it,
it grew, it became the Virgin show.
Right.
And, um, but that's just tapping in again to something that's been happening for 400 years, right.
With, with, uh, 500 years almost with, with the, um, with the Mexicanos.
And, and then it was with a sense of shock that I realized that she's just as popular in the Philippines.
I went to the cathedral in Manila.
And there's the Virgen de Guadalupe.
And there are all these petitioners going on their knees, like in Mexico.
These are Filipinos.
And they call the Virgen, the Virgen, please, Virgen.
We go pray to the Virgen, please.
And the thing is, I said, wow, okay, there's a lot of heritage here.
Yeah.
Just to kind of go back to the Mexican Revolution connection to the Chicano movement.
So it's not just those images, right, or those performances, whether it's the clap, whether it's the Vidhin banner, whether it is the music, but it's also maybe the ideals, the values, the...
you know, so justice for workers, for the peasants, for the Indians, really.
You know, land, identity, this whole kind of like transformation that happens, you know, what Vasconcelos does is he takes that, right, and he transforms it.
He transforms that idea of
hey, mestizaje is actually, that's something we can be proud of, right?
Because prior to that, you know, we were talking about the scientific racism, you know, and you have the U.S., you have Europe saying, oh, anybody who's mixed is inferior, right?
Yeah, yeah.
And so Vasconcelos basically is saying, now we're going to twist that around and we're going to talk about how this mix, these people who are mixed, the Mexican, right,
is actually the race that's going to progress the... Well, I think what he was doing was he was actually reaching out from a European base.
Yes.
The Ulysses Criollo part of him.
To incorporate the indígena, which had not been done in Mexico yet.
Right.
The idea, okay, this is part of me.
This makes me a la raza cosmica.
I can absorb this, you know.
This cultural and racial fusion is what he's talking about.
Yes.
And that was a new idea.
Okay.
So openly, so publicly in the name of the government to be pushed that.
And it has led, I think, to the contemporary concept the Mexicans have themselves, you know, they haven't completely embraced the indígena yet though, you know, if they, if they, if they would, I think that Mexico would be in a much better place if they took these indígena concepts seriously, you know, but they're still ignorant of it.
Do you think that's the same for like Chicanos or Mexicanos, Latinos in the U.S.?
I think that you can, yeah, it's all right to integrate.
It's all right to assimilate.
But you got to hold on to what's yours.
You know, don't lose that as you go along.
Don't lose your beans.
You know, don't lose your magic beans.
I was like, did he say beans or beans?
Beans, okay.
No, it's like, you know, Jack and the Beanstalk, you're magic beans, you know, and this is your culture.
And if you sacrifice that, you're sacrificing yourself and then you're, all right, you're disappearing to the mass and the mass is still there.
No one lives forever.
But at the same time, you have a contribution to make.
And I realized also as an activist, as an arts activist, that we are contributing.
We're not taking, we're bringing stuff.
you know, from our heritage under the main stage, under the main stream and say, this has to be accepted because this is good stuff.
You know, don't, don't, don't deny this.
Don't deny us because of this.
But I would say that every culture has something to give on that regard.
Right.
And, and that, that, and it comes through many, many different forms.
It comes through the arts, music, dance.
It comes through business.
You know, I wish we had a better business sense, you know, I mean, we Mexicanos had a better business sense.
Some people do, it varies from individual to individual, but generally speaking, the Chinese are better at business than we are.
Okay.
It is a reason why the Jews are real good at banking is because they were the money changers, you know, as prejudicial as that may sound, the fact is that it's history and that's culture.
And not only that, they devoted themselves to
they being the Jews devoted themselves to a certain kind of intellectual, um, intellectual exercise that they do with a Talmud, you know, it's, it's, they, they, it's question and response, you know, it is intellectual investigations that they do on their own in the name of God in the search that allows them really to be very intellectual.
You know, they, they, their minds are,
It's like any muscle.
They have a lot of strong muscles, you know, they're able to exercise.
So there's a lot of intellectual brilliance there as a result of that activity, which they have.
They also wrote the book, you know, they wrote the Bible.
They wrote it down.
Every culture has had religious and spiritual ideas, but not every culture has taken the trouble to write it down, get a language going and write it down.
The Mayas wrote it down.
That's what I'm saying about our culture is that we have links that take us back and that we can then disseminate those ideas and incorporate them into the modern life, right?
Because it was written down.
But the fact is that every culture has something to bring.
Every culture has the same brilliance that manifests in their own way.
And this kind of interchange that we get between people, whether it's just casual intermixing or working together or marrying and having children, all of that feeds the mainstream.
You know what I'm saying?
It's really important.
Do you ever read W.E.B.
Du Bois?
Yeah.
Oh yeah.
Like Du Bois.
I forget if it's a book.
I think he's got a book.
It's called the gift of black folk.
Yeah.
And then some of his earlier work though, he really kind of talks about, Hey, everybody, every race has a contribution.
That's right.
Yeah.
No, they give to the world, to society.
He was a wonderful ideologue.
I mean, he had brilliant ideas, which he shared, you know, with people and, and
And they're still current, they're still going and people have built on, on, on what he can, but then he had others before him too.
There are people that came, you know, Frederick Douglass was an ideologue, you know?
But the thing is that even people didn't write books like Harriet Tubman, you know, contributed to the consciousness.
What is the consciousness, you know, of, of the people at large and where does it come from?
And,
Women in general have not been acknowledged, you know, for their intellectual brilliance and their contributions to culture.
That's a, a big one that we're still working on.
And just looking back at it now, I'm amazed how primitive things are in that regard still, you know, and in the world.
And, and it's, it's an evil actually that there's so much oppression of women for being women.
And, and I say that as a man and I'm ashamed, frankly, of, uh,
what men have done.
I, I, uh, and, and, and I'm hoping that it will see changes, you know, as we go, they're inevitable.
Yeah.
But as we go along here, uh, uh, I do think that, uh, people just have to get smart about it and to get wise, you know, as to what's happening.
Um, well, I think that's, that's really kind of all I have.
Um,
I think a lot of the questions that I usually ask in this section kind of covered a lot of, is there anything that you want to add before we shut this off?
Well, you know, we talk about the Chicano movement and people wonder, okay, where does it all come from and what is the meaning of it?
And I read someone recently that there's this little village in Northern Mexico called Chicana.
And that's just the name of the town, Chicana.
And the people that came from there are Chicanos.
And it's so close to the U.S.
border that a lot of the early immigrants that arrived in California, especially in Texas, were Chicanos that came from Chicana.
And so that may be one of the roots, you know, for the Chicano movement in that sense, that it came from a specific place.
But what it really relates to is the whole process of immigration and crossing the border.
And these days we're all into borders and immigration and it's just one more manifestation of the same shit.
You know, it's always been there.
People trying to accept somebody else and setting up boundaries and walls and trying to separate, you know, or exclude.
It happened within the Chicano movement itself.
You know, there was a tendency to become more Chicano than thou in some campuses and they form cliques.
It just seems to be a human trait that needs to be dealt with on some level.
It happens in religion.
It happens in politics.
We're seeing this whole Democrat versus Republican thing, which has gotten ridiculous.
It's gotten absolutely ridiculous now.
This tribal shit, you know, as if we're playing football or something.
It's not football.
And, um,
But the fact is that, that in time, everything changes the river of time and the river of ideas and the river of history and culture, uh, takes all things with it.
You know, it transforms everything.
And, uh, that's how the grand Canyon was built.
You know what I mean?
So we have this grand Canyon that we're working on, you know, of human history and the river keeps flowing and it will continue to flow.
Uh, if we're lucky.
into the foreseeable future.
But, um, the fact is that we need more understanding of each other and, and the way that we relocate ourselves into a place that is more is by opening up the stoppers, not by closing them up, by understanding how our particular relative position at this place at the point in time is just that it's a point in, in motion.
And that, uh,
Who knows a hundred years from now what the term Chicano will mean.
And I'm pretty sure Mexico will still be there a hundred years from now.
There's no reason why you can't imagine that.
And the United States will be where it is.
What will happen with that wall is something else.
They'll find a good use for it.
They in the future will find a good use for it.
But at this point, it's silly.
it really is ridiculous that impulse to try to build that wall.
It's just, uh, instead of looking at what really the problem is and was, you know, it's our interconnectedness.
That's the problem.
And that if there's poverty in Mexico, uh, it's going to affect us here.
And that, uh, and it's not all the fault of the Mexicans, you know, all those companies that go invest in Mexico and
suck the light blood out of it, you know, are responsible.
Yeah.
For the desperation we've seen, not just in Mexico, in Central America, you know, Americans love their bananas too much.
And I think, um, I mean, just to kind of speak to that, that a little bit, um, you know, I, I think it, it really is just a, it's a clashing of idea of ideologies, right?
Mm-hmm.
you have an ideology in the US, this kind of like white Eurocentric ideology that says, hey, we can control this.
Yeah.
Right?
We can control the earth.
Yeah.
We can control people.
Control women.
And yeah, all of that, right?
By setting up fences, by putting laws in place that criminalize people coming over, that set up, you know, the policies that are
causing these people to want to come over right now.
Right.
And, and the thing is like, there's just a real lack of like these people, you know, we're talking about genetic memory.
That's their genetic memory.
We've been going back and forth, right.
For thousands of years.
Um, and I think it's just this, it's this clash between that kind of controlling Eurocentric type of philosophy or ideology.
And this one that is just like, you can't do that.
The earth and the universe will not let you do that, no matter how hard you try it.
Exactly.
Well, there's la raza cosmica, you know.
That's where it becomes universal in relation to the universe.
Everything is spinning, you know.
It's what I call the power of the mind zero.
It's a spin.
Anyway.
All right.
Another book.
I know, I know.
I feel like we could talk forever here.
Okay.
Thank you.